Español
Family and Medical Leave Act and California Family Rights Act FAQs
Find answers to the frequently asked questions about the Family and Medical Leave Act (FMLA) and the California Family Rights Act (CFRA) employee leave laws.
For detailed information about FMLA, visit the
Department of Labor
or call 1-866-487-2365.
For detailed information about CFRA, visit the
Civil Rights Department
or call 1-800-884-1684.
Show All
What are the FMLA and CFRA laws?
The FMLA and the CFRA are federal and state leave laws that allow eligible employees of covered employers to take unpaid, job-protected leave.
FMLA and CFRA help to protect your job while you are receiving Disability Insurance or Paid Family Leave benefits when you must:
Take medical leave for yourself.
Care for a family member who is seriously ill.
Bond with a new child.
Participate in a qualifying event because of a family member’s military deployment to a foreign country.
What is the difference between Disability Insurance, Paid Family Leave, and employee leave laws?
Disability Insurance (DI) and Paid Family Leave (PFL) provide wage replacement benefits only; they do not provide job protection. DI and PFL do not change the federal or state leave laws in any way and are completely separate from them. Your job may be protected under other employee leave laws, such as the
FMLA
or the
CFRA
.
DI provides up to 52 weeks of paid benefits when you are unable to work and have a wage loss due to your own non-work-related illness, injury, pregnancy, or childbirth.
PFL provides up to eight weeks of paid benefits when you have a wage loss due to taking time off work to:
Care for a seriously ill family member.
Bond with a new child.
Participate in a qualifying event because of a family member’s military deployment to a foreign country.
Do Disability Insurance and Paid Family Leave protect my job when I am receiving benefits?
No. Disability Insurance and Paid Family Leave provide wage replacement benefits only; they do not provide job protection. Your job may be protected under other employee leave laws, such as the
FMLA
or
CFRA
.
Can my employer require me to take leave under the FMLA and CFRA when I am receiving Disability Insurance or Paid Family Leave benefits?
Yes. If your company is covered by the terms of
FMLA
and
CFRA
, your employer may require you to take FMLA and CFRA leave while you’re receiving Disability Insurance or Paid Family Leave benefits.
Disability Insurance and Paid Family Leave Benefits
State Disability Insurance (SDI)
Disability Insurance (DI)
Elective Coverage (DIEC)
Paid Family Leave (PFL)
Find DI Information for You
Physicians/Practitioners
State Employees
Employers and Self-Employed/Independent Contractor
Employers/Employees of Voluntary Plan
Register for myEDD
Creating an account is an important step in this process. With myEDD, you can apply for Disability Insurance and manage your claim in SDI Online
.
Create Account
Log In
Disability Resources
Rates and Withholding
Payroll Taxes
Appeals
Benefit Overpayments and Penalties
Forms and Publications
Family and Medical Leave Act and California Family Rights Act FAQs
Tax Form 1099G
Disability and Paid Family Leave Calculator
Employers Overview
Help