[page 1]
For more information, visit  
Paid Family Leave  
(edd.ca.gov/PaidFamilyLeave).
The EDD is an equal opportunity employer/program. Auxiliary aids and services 
are available upon request to individuals with disabilities. Requests for services, 
aids, and/or alternate formats need to be made by calling 1-866-490-8879 
(voice). TTY users, please call the California Relay Service at 711.
Paid Family Leave 
Helping 
Californians  
be present for 
the moments  
that matter.
About Paid Family Leave
Paid Family Leave program was created for the 
moments that matter. Benefits are available to care 
for a seriously ill family member, to bond with a new 
child, or participate in a qualifying military event.
Facts About  
Paid Family Leave
• Provides up to eight weeks of partial-wage-
replacement benefits. Leave doesn’t have to be
taken all at once.
• Provides approximately 70 to 90 percent of your
weekly salary.
• Funded through your State Disabilit y Insurance
tax withholding, noted as “CASDI” on paystubs,
or a qualifying voluntary plan paid into in the past
5 to 18 months.
• To bond with a new child, leave can be taken
anytime within the first 12 months of a child
entering your family.
• Citizenship and immigration status do not
affect eligibility.
What if My Claim Is Denied?
If your claim is denied, you have the right to:
• Know the reason for denial.
• Appeal decisions about your eligibility for
benefits. Visit Appeals  (edd.ca.gov/en/Disability/
Appeals) for more information.
All claim information is confidential except for 
purposes allowed by law.
Paid Family Leave
Be there for the moments that matter.
PFL Phone Number
Our toll-free number is 1-877-238-4373 . 
Representatives are available Monday 
through Friday from 8 a.m. to 5 p.m., 
except on holidays. After a brief 
message, you must select a language. 
• Press 1 for English
• Press 2 for Spanish
• Press 3 for All Other Languages.
Interpreter services are available
free of charge.
TTY Phone Number 
Our toll-free number is 1-880-445-1312 . 
For more information, visit State 
Disability Insurance (edd.ca.gov/en/
Disability/Contact_SDI) 
DE 2511 Rev. 23 (5-25) (INTERNET) Page 1 of 2

[page 2]
How Do I Apply for Benefits? 
You can apply for Paid Family Leave benefits at 
myEDD (myedd.edd.ca.gov).
To file by mail, you must complete and submit a 
Claim for Paid Family Leave (PFL) Benefits (DE 
2501F) form. Learn more at File a Paid Family Leave 
Claim by Mail (edd.ca.gov/en/disability/How_to_
File_a_PFL_Claim_by_Mail).
Caregiving Claims
Provide medical certification for your seriously 
ill family member who requires your care. This 
certification needs to be from their licensed health 
professional. You must also provide information 
about the family member you are caring for and 
their signature.
Bonding Claims
Provide documents that show your relationship to 
your child. This can be a copy of your child’s birth 
certificate, adoptive placement agreement, or foster 
care placement record.
If you are currently receiving pregnancy-related 
Disability Insurance benefits, it is not necessary to 
request a Paid Family Leave claim form. The form 
to file for bonding will be sent through your myEDD 
(myedd.edd.ca.gov) account or by mail when your 
pregnancy-related disability claim ends.
Military Assist Claims
Military assist claims require two types of 
supporting documents. This can be proof of 
covered active duty or call to covered active duty 
and documentation of the qualifying event.
Voluntary Plans
If you are covered by a voluntary plan, contact your 
employer for information about your coverage and 
instructions on how to apply for benefits.
Do I Qualify for  
Paid Family Leave?
To qualify for Paid Family Leave benefits, you must: 
• Take time off from work to care for a seriously 
ill family member, to bond with a new child or to 
participate in a qualifying military event.
• Be covered by State Disability Insurance or a 
voluntary plan in lieu of State Disability Insurance.
• Have earned at least $300 in the past 
5 to 18 months.
• Submit your claim no later than 41 days after you 
begin your family leave. Do not file before your 
first day of leave.
How Are Benefit 
Amounts Calculated?
Benefits are 70 to 90 percent of your highest 
quarterly earnings 5 to 18 months before 
your claim begins.
Estimate your benefits at Disability Insurance and 
Paid Family Leave Calculator  
(edd.ca.gov/PFL_Calculator).
Does Paid Family Leave 
Provide Job Protection?
Paid Family Leave does not provide job protection. 
Job protection may be provided if you qualify 
under other laws:
• Federal Family and Medical Leave Act  
(dol.gov/agencies/whd/fmla).
• California Family Rights Act. Civil Rights 
Department (calcivilrights.ca.gov).
Notify your employer of your plan to take leave 
and the reason for taking leave according to your 
company’s policy.
DE 2511 Rev. 23 (5-25) (INTERNET) Page 2 of 2