[page 1]
Application for a §1915(c) Home and Community-
Based Services Waiver
PURPOSE OF THE HCBS WAIVER PROGRAM
The Medicaid Home and Community-Based Services (HCBS) waiver program is authorized in §1915(c) of the Social Security 
Act. The program permits a state to furnish an array of home and community-based services that assist Medicaid beneficiaries to 
live in the community and avoid institutionalization. The State has broad discretion to design its waiver program to address the 
needs of the waivers target population. Waiver services complement and/or supplement the services that are available to 
participants through the Medicaid State plan and other federal, state and local public programs as well as the supports that families 
and communities provide.
The Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) recognizes that the design and operational features of a waiver program 
will vary depending on the specific needs of the target population, the resources available to the state, service delivery system 
structure, state goals and objectives, and other factors. A State has the latitude to design a waiver program that is cost-effective 
and employs a variety of service delivery approaches, including participant direction of services.
Request for an Amendment to a §1915(c) Home and Community-Based Services 
Waiver
1. Request Information
The State  of California  requests approval for an amendment to the following Medicaid home and community-based 
services waiver approved under authority of §1915(c) of the Social Security Act.
A. 
Program Title:
California Assisted Living Waiver
B. 
Waiver Number: CA.0431
Original Base Waiver Number: CA.0431.
C. 
Amendment Number: CA.0431.R03.12D. 
Proposed Effective Date:  (mm/dd/yy)
11/12/23
Approved Effective Date: 11/12/23
Approved Effective Date of Waiver being Amended: 03/01/19
E. 
2. Purpose(s) of Amendment
Purpose(s) of the Amendment. Describe the purpose(s) of the amendment:
 
The purpose of this amendment is to include telehealth as a permanent service delivery option for specified waiver services, in 
compliance with California Welfare and Institutions Code section 14132.725; federal statute and regulations; and as agreed upon 
by the applicant, participant, legal representative, and Medi-Cal provider. This amendment also allows Coordinated Care 
Agencies to add social workers as qualified individuals to provide Care Coordination waiver services.  
3. Nature of the Amendment
Component(s) of the Approved Waiver Affected by the Amendment. This amendment affects the following 
component(s) of the approved waiver. Revisions to the affected subsection(s) of these component(s) are being submitted 
concurrently (check each that applies):
Component of the 
Approved Waiver Subsection(s)
 Waiver 
Application
Additional Needed Information
 Appendix A   
A. 
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 1 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 2]
Component of the 
Approved Waiver Subsection(s)
Waiver 
Administration 
and Operation
 Appendix B  
Participant 
Access and 
Eligibility
B-2, b; B-6, c, e, i
 Appendix C  
Participant 
Services
C-1/C-3, Case Management Service Definition; C-1, c
 Appendix D  
Participant 
Centered 
Service 
Planning and 
Delivery
D-1, a, d
 Appendix E  
Participant 
Direction of 
Services
 
 Appendix F  
Participant 
Rights
 
 Appendix G  
Participant 
Safeguards
 
 Appendix H  
 Appendix I  
Financial 
Accountability
 
 Appendix J  
Cost-Neutrality 
Demonstration
 
Nature of the Amendment. Indicate the nature of the changes to the waiver that are proposed in the amendment (check 
each that applies):
 Modify target group(s)
 Modify Medicaid eligibility
 Add/delete services
 Revise service specifications
 Revise provider qualifications
 Increase/decrease number of participants
 Revise cost neutrality demonstration
 Add participant-direction of services
 Other
Specify:
 
Adding authority to provide telehealth as a service delivery model for specified waiver services.  
B. 
Application for a §1915(c) Home and Community-Based Services Waiver
1. Request Information (1 of 3)
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 2 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 3]
The State  of California  requests approval for a Medicaid home and community-based services (HCBS) waiver under the 
authority of §1915(c) of the Social Security Act (the Act).
A. 
Program Title  ( optional - this title will be used to locate this waiver in the finder ):
 
California Assisted Living Waiver  
B. 
Type of Request: amendment
Requested Approval Period: (For new waivers requesting five year approval periods, the waiver must serve individuals 
who are dually eligible for Medicaid and Medicare.)
 3 years  5 years
Original Base Waiver Number: CA.0431
Waiver Number: CA.0431.R03.12
Draft ID: CA.010.03.02
C. 
Type of Waiver  (select only one):
Regular Waiver
D. 
Proposed Effective Date of Waiver being Amended: 03/01/19
Approved Effective Date of Waiver being Amended: 03/01/19
E. 
PRA Disclosure Statement
The purpose of this application is for states to request a Medicaid Section 1915(c) home and 
community-based services (HCBS) waiver. Section 1915(c) of the Social Security Act authorizes the 
Secretary of Health and Human Services to waive certain specific Medicaid statutory requirements so 
that a state may voluntarily offer HCBS to state-specified target group(s) of Medicaid beneficiaries who 
need a level of institutional care that is provided under the Medicaid state plan. Under the Privacy Act 
of 1974 any personally identifying information obtained will be kept private to the extent of the law.
According to the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1995, no persons are required to respond to a collection 
of information unless it displays a valid OMB control number. The valid OMB control number for this 
information collection is 0938-0449 (Expires: December 31, 2023). The time required to complete this 
information collection is estimated to average 160 hours per response for a new waiver application and 
75 hours per response for a renewal application, including the time to review instructions, search 
existing data resources, gather the data needed, and complete and review the information collection. If 
you have comments concerning the accuracy of the time estimate(s) or suggestions for improving this 
form, please write to: CMS, 7500 Security Boulevard, Attn: PRA Reports Clearance Officer, Mail Stop 
C4-26-05, Baltimore, Maryland 21244-1850.
1. Request Information (2 of 3)
Level(s) of Care . This waiver is requested in order to provide home and community-based waiver services to individuals 
who, but for the provision of such services, would require the following level(s) of care, the costs of which would be 
reimbursed under the approved Medicaid state plan ( check each that applies ):
 Hospital
Select applicable level of care
 Hospital as defined in 42 CFR §440.10
If applicable, specify whether the state additionally limits the waiver to subcategories of the hospital level of 
care:
 
 
 
 Inpatient psychiatric facility for individuals age 21 and under as provided in42 CFR §440.160
 Nursing Facility
F. 
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 3 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 4]
Select applicable level of care
 Nursing Facility as defined in 42 CFR ??440.40 and 42 CFR ??440.155
If applicable, specify whether the state additionally limits the waiver to subcategories of the nursing facility level 
of care:
 
 
 
 Institution for Mental Disease for persons with mental illnesses aged 65 and older as provided in 42 CFR 
§440.140
 Intermediate Care Facility for Individuals with Intellectual Disabilities (ICF/IID) (as defined in 42 CFR 
§440.150)
If applicable, specify whether the state additionally limits the waiver to subcategories of the ICF/IID level of care:
 
 
 
1. Request Information (3 of 3)
Concurrent Operation with Other Programs.  This waiver operates concurrently with another program (or programs) 
approved under the following authorities
Select one:
 Not applicable
 Applicable
Check the applicable authority or authorities:
 Services furnished under the provisions of §1915(a)(1)(a) of the Act and described in Appendix I
 Waiver(s) authorized under §1915(b) of the Act.
Specify the §1915(b) waiver program and indicate whether a §1915(b) waiver application has been submitted or 
previously approved:
 
 
 
Specify the §1915(b) authorities under which this program operates (check each that applies):
 §1915(b)(1) (mandated enrollment to managed care)
 §1915(b)(2) (central broker)
 §1915(b)(3) (employ cost savings to furnish additional services)
 §1915(b)(4) (selective contracting/limit number of providers)
 A program operated under §1932(a) of the Act.
Specify the nature of the state plan benefit and indicate whether the state plan amendment has been submitted or 
previously approved:
 
 
 
 A program authorized under §1915(i) of the Act.
 A program authorized under §1915(j) of the Act.
 A program authorized under §1115 of the Act.
Specify the program:
 
 
 
G. 
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 4 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 5]
Dual Eligiblity for Medicaid and Medicare.
Check if applicable:
 This waiver provides services for individuals who are eligible for both Medicare and Medicaid.
H. 
2. Brief Waiver Description
Brief Waiver Description. In one page or less , briefly describe the purpose of the waiver, including its goals, objectives, 
organizational structure (e.g., the roles of state, local and other entities), and service delivery methods.
 
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 5 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 6]
The Assisted Living Waiver (ALW) offers Medi-Cal eligible beneficiaries the choice of residing in an assisted living setting as 
an alternative to long-term placement in a nursing facility.  The goal of the ALW is to facilitate nursing facility transition back 
into a homelike and community setting or prevent skilled nursing admissions for beneficiaries with an imminent need for nursing 
facility placement. 
 
Assisted Living services from Tier one to five are provided to eligible participants who live in Residential Care Facilities for the 
Elderly(RCFE), Adult Residential Facilities (ARFs) or Public Subsidized Housing (PSH) sites.  Services are delivered by either 
the RCF staff or licensed Home Health Agency staff based on the participant’s choice of residential setting. 
 
Tier Five was added in an amendment just prior to this renewal.  Tier Five is a community residential option for participants who 
have physical and mental disabilities that make being in other facilities, such as skilled nursing facilities, or in Tiers one through 
four of the ALW, inappropriate.  Participants eligible for Tier Five services will require Nursing Facility Level of Care but will 
also exhibit severe mental/cognitive disabilities as a result of a traumatic brain injury.  They will also have demonstrated one or 
more failed placements in the past. 
 
Residential Habilitation is available to all tiers, requires prior approval from DHCS Nurse Evaluators and provides for additional, 
appropriate staff to assist in acquiring, retaining and improving the self-help, socialization and adaptive skills as needed by the 
participant.  This may be one-to-one or some other ratio of staff-to-participant depending on need. 
 
Augmented Plan of Care Development and Follow-up is available to tiers 4 and 5, requires prior approval from DHCS Nurse 
Evaluators and provides for additional, appropriate staff to have an increased level of contact with the participant. 
Documentation of this increased level of contact is required to be maintained in the participant’s case file. The service is 
comprised of two parts: 
 
• A behavior assessment or systematic assessment of a participant’s behavior that includes a description of their functional and 
dysfunctional behaviors, the circumstances under which identified behaviors are exhibited and the factors that should be taken 
into account when developing a programmatic response to the behavior(s).  This assessment is followed by the development of a 
written behavior plan; training personnel to implement the behavior plan; monitoring the effectiveness of the behavior plan; and 
modifying the plan as necessary.  The written behavior plan shall identify those participants who need more structured 
approaches to address challenging behaviors (such as Residential Habilitation Services). 
 
• Those care coordination activities described under “Care Coordination” plus additional assessment and determination of 
possible mental health and psychiatric service needs of the participant, including the prescription and management of psychiatric 
medications.  The Care Coordination Agencies (CCA) shall work closely with the County Mental Health plans to coordinate 
mental health services and ongoing medication management.  The increased level of contact with the participant and 
coordination with County Mental Health is expected to require approximately twice the contact and assistance as persons who 
receive the routine Care Coordination services. 
 
Every waiver participant receives Care Coordination from an independent CCA.  A Registered Nurse (RN) or Social Worker 
with the CCA administers a semiannual (every six months) assessment for level of care determination.  The CCA develops the 
Individualized Service Plan (ISP) to identify the participant's needs and the methodology to meet those needs.  The assisted 
living provider is either the RCFE, ARF or a Home Health Agency (HHA) in the PSH setting.  The assisted living provider is 
responsible for meeting the needs of the participant, including Activities of Daily Living (ADLs) Instrumental ADLs (IADLs), 
meals, transportation, medication administration and skilled nursing as needed.  The RCFE/ARFs are licensed and regulated by 
the California Department of Social Services, Community Care Licensing (CCL) Division.  The HHA renders assisted living 
services in the PSH setting.  The HHA is responsible for meeting the needs of the participant analogous to the RCFE/ARF.  Meal 
preparation may be provided individually in each participant's apartment, or in a common dining area depending on the 
availability of common space at the PSH site.  The HHAs are licensed and regulated by the California Department of Public 
Health, Licensing and Certification Division (L&C).  
3. Components of the Waiver Request
The waiver application consists of the following components.  Note: Item 3-E must be completed .
Waiver Administration and Operation.  Appendix A  specifies the administrative and operational structure of this 
waiver.
A. 
Participant Access and Eligibility.  Appendix B  specifies the target group(s) of individuals who are served in this waiver, B. 
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 6 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 7]
the number of participants that the state expects to serve during each year that the waiver is in effect, applicable Medicaid 
eligibility and post-eligibility (if applicable) requirements, and procedures for the evaluation and reevaluation of level of 
care.
Participant Services.  Appendix C  specifies the home and community-based waiver services that are furnished through 
the waiver, including applicable limitations on such services.
C. 
Participant-Centered Service Planning and Delivery.  Appendix D  specifies the procedures and methods that the state 
uses to develop, implement and monitor the participant-centered service plan (of care).
D. 
Participant-Direction of Services. When the state provides for participant direction of services, Appendix E  specifies the 
participant direction opportunities that are offered in the waiver and the supports that are available to participants who 
direct their services. ( Select one ):
 Yes. This waiver provides participant direction opportunities.  Appendix E is required.
 No. This waiver does not provide participant direction opportunities.  Appendix E is not required.
E. 
Participant Rights.  Appendix F  specifies how the state informs participants of their Medicaid Fair Hearing rights and 
other procedures to address participant grievances and complaints.
F. 
Participant Safeguards.  Appendix G  describes the safeguards that the state has established to assure the health and 
welfare of waiver participants in specified areas.
G. 
Quality Improvement Strategy.  Appendix H  contains the Quality Improvement Strategy for this waiver.H. 
Financial Accountability.  Appendix I  describes the methods by which the state makes payments for waiver services, 
ensures the integrity of these payments, and complies with applicable federal requirements concerning payments and 
federal financial participation.
I. 
Cost-Neutrality Demonstration.  Appendix J  contains the state's demonstration that the waiver is cost-neutral.J. 
4. Waiver(s) Requested
Comparability.  The state requests a waiver of the requirements contained in §1902(a)(10)(B) of the Act in order to 
provide the services specified in Appendix C  that are not otherwise available under the approved Medicaid state plan to 
individuals who: (a) require the level(s) of care specified in Item 1.F and (b) meet the target group criteria specified in 
Appendix B .
A. 
Income and Resources for the Medically Needy.  Indicate whether the state requests a waiver of §1902(a)(10)(C)(i)(III) 
of the Act in order to use institutional income and resource rules for the medically needy (select one) :
 Not Applicable
 No
 Yes
B. 
Statewideness.  Indicate whether the state requests a waiver of the statewideness requirements in §1902(a)(1) of the Act 
(select one) :
 No
 Yes
If yes, specify the waiver of statewideness that is requested (check each that applies) :
 Geographic Limitation. A waiver of statewideness is requested in order to furnish services under this waiver 
only to individuals who reside in the following geographic areas or political subdivisions of the state.
Specify the areas to which this waiver applies and, as applicable, the phase-in schedule of the waiver by 
geographic area:
 
C. 
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 7 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 8]
The ALW is currently implemented in the following counties: Alameda, Contra Costa, Fresno, Kern, Los 
Angeles, Orange, Riverside, Sacramento, San Bernardino, San Diego, San Joaquin, San Mateo, Santa Clara, 
Sonoma and San Francisco Counties. 
 
Additional Counties may be added in the future through an Amendment to this waiver.  
 Limited Implementation of Participant-Direction. A waiver of statewideness is requested in order to make 
participant-direction of services as specified in Appendix E available only to individuals who reside in the 
following geographic areas or political subdivisions of the state. Participants who reside in these areas may elect 
to direct their services as provided by the state or receive comparable services through the service delivery 
methods that are in effect elsewhere in the state.
Specify the areas of the state affected by this waiver and, as applicable, the phase-in schedule of the waiver by 
geographic area:
 
 
 
5. Assurances
In accordance with 42 CFR §441.302, the state provides the following assurances to CMS:
Health & Welfare:  The state assures that necessary safeguards have been taken to protect the health and welfare of 
persons receiving services under this waiver. These safeguards include:
As specified in Appendix C , adequate standards for all types of providers that provide services under this waiver;1. 
Assurance that the standards of any state licensure or certification requirements specified in Appendix C  are met 
for services or for individuals furnishing services that are provided under the waiver. The state assures that these 
requirements are met on the date that the services are furnished; and,
2. 
Assurance that all facilities subject to §1616(e) of the Act where home and community-based waiver services are 
provided comply with the applicable state standards for board and care facilities as specified in Appendix C .
3. 
A. 
Financial Accountability.  The state assures financial accountability for funds expended for home and community-based 
services and maintains and makes available to the Department of Health and Human Services (including the Office of the 
Inspector General), the Comptroller General, or other designees, appropriate financial records documenting the cost of 
services provided under the waiver. Methods of financial accountability are specified in Appendix I .
B. 
Evaluation of Need:  The state assures that it provides for an initial evaluation (and periodic reevaluations, at least 
annually) of the need for a level of care specified for this waiver, when there is a reasonable indication that an individual 
might need such services in the near future (one month or less) but for the receipt of home and community-based services 
under this waiver. The procedures for evaluation and reevaluation of level of care are specified in Appendix B .
C. 
Choice of Alternatives:  The state assures that when an individual is determined to be likely to require the level of care 
specified for this waiver and is in a target group specified in Appendix B , the individual (or, legal representative, if 
applicable) is:
Informed of any feasible alternatives under the waiver; and,1. 
Given the choice of either institutional or home and community-based waiver services. Appendix B  specifies the 
procedures that the state employs to ensure that individuals are informed of feasible alternatives under the waiver 
and given the choice of institutional or home and community-based waiver services.
2. 
D. 
Average Per Capita Expenditures:  The state assures that, for any year that the waiver is in effect, the average per capita 
expenditures under the waiver will not exceed 100 percent of the average per capita expenditures that would have been 
made under the Medicaid state plan for the level(s) of care specified for this waiver had the waiver not been granted. Cost-
neutrality is demonstrated in Appendix J .
E. 
Actual Total Expenditures:  The state assures that the actual total expenditures for home and community-based waiver 
and other Medicaid services and its claim for FFP in expenditures for the services provided to individuals under the waiver 
F. 
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 8 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 9]
will not, in any year of the waiver period, exceed 100 percent of the amount that would be incurred in the absence of the 
waiver by the state's Medicaid program for these individuals in the institutional setting(s) specified for this waiver.
Institutionalization Absent Waiver:  The state assures that, absent the waiver, individuals served in the waiver would 
receive the appropriate type of Medicaid-funded institutional care for the level of care specified for this waiver.
G. 
Reporting:  The state assures that annually it will provide CMS with information concerning the impact of the waiver on 
the type, amount and cost of services provided under the Medicaid state plan and on the health and welfare of waiver 
participants. This information will be consistent with a data collection plan designed by CMS.
H. 
Habilitation Services.  The state assures that prevocational, educational, or supported employment services, or a 
combination of these services, if provided as habilitation services under the waiver are: (1) not otherwise available to the 
individual through a local educational agency under the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA) or the 
Rehabilitation Act of 1973; and, (2) furnished as part of expanded habilitation services.
I. 
Services for Individuals with Chronic Mental Illness.  The state assures that federal financial participation (FFP) will 
not be claimed in expenditures for waiver services including, but not limited to, day treatment or partial hospitalization, 
psychosocial rehabilitation services, and clinic services provided as home and community-based services to individuals 
with chronic mental illnesses if these individuals, in the absence of a waiver, would be placed in an IMD and are: (1) age 
22 to 64; (2) age 65 and older and the state has not included the optional Medicaid benefit cited in 42 CFR §440.140; or 
(3) age 21 and under and the state has not included the optional Medicaid benefit cited in 42 CFR § 440.160.
J. 
6. Additional Requirements
Note: Item 6-I must be completed.
Service Plan . In accordance with 42 CFR §441.301(b)(1)(i), a participant-centered service plan (of care) is developed for 
each participant employing the procedures specified in Appendix D . All waiver services are furnished pursuant to the 
service plan. The service plan describes: (a) the waiver services that are furnished to the participant, their projected 
frequency and the type of provider that furnishes each service and (b) the other services (regardless of funding source, 
including state plan services) and informal supports that complement waiver services in meeting the needs of the 
participant. The service plan is subject to the approval of the Medicaid agency. Federal financial participation (FFP) is not 
claimed for waiver services furnished prior to the development of the service plan or for services that are not included in 
the service plan.
A. 
Inpatients . In accordance with 42 CFR §441.301(b)(1)(ii), waiver services are not furnished to individuals who are in-
patients of a hospital, nursing facility or ICF/IID.
B. 
Room and Board . In accordance with 42 CFR §441.310(a)(2), FFP is not claimed for the cost of room and board except 
when: (a) provided as part of respite services in a facility approved by the state that is not a private residence or (b) 
claimed as a portion of the rent and food that may be reasonably attributed to an unrelated caregiver who resides in the 
same household as the participant, as provided in Appendix I .
C. 
Access to Services . The state does not limit or restrict participant access to waiver services except as provided in 
Appendix C .
D. 
Free Choice of Provider . In accordance with 42 CFR §431.151, a participant may select any willing and qualified 
provider to furnish waiver services included in the service plan unless the state has received approval to limit the number 
of providers under the provisions of §1915(b) or another provision of the Act.
E. 
FFP Limitation . In accordance with 42 CFR §433 Subpart D, FFP is not claimed for services when another third-party 
(e.g., another third party health insurer or other federal or state program) is legally liable and responsible for the provision 
and payment of the service. FFP also may not be claimed for services that are available without charge, or as free care to 
the community. Services will not be considered to be without charge, or free care, when (1) the provider establishes a fee 
schedule for each service available and (2) collects insurance information from all those served (Medicaid, and non-
Medicaid), and bills other legally liable third party insurers. Alternatively, if a provider certifies that a particular legally 
liable third party insurer does not pay for the service(s), the provider may not generate further bills for that insurer for that 
annual period.
F. 
Fair Hearing:  The state provides the opportunity to request a Fair Hearing under 42 CFR §431 Subpart E, to individuals: G. 
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 9 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 10]
(a) who are not given the choice of home and community-based waiver services as an alternative to institutional level of 
care specified for this waiver; (b) who are denied the service(s) of their choice or the provider(s) of their choice; or (c) 
whose services are denied, suspended, reduced or terminated. Appendix F  specifies the state's procedures to provide 
individuals the opportunity to request a Fair Hearing, including providing notice of action as required in 42 CFR §431.210.
Quality Improvement . The state operates a formal, comprehensive system to ensure that the waiver meets the assurances 
and other requirements contained in this application. Through an ongoing process of discovery, remediation and 
improvement, the state assures the health and welfare of participants by monitoring: (a) level of care determinations; (b) 
individual plans and services delivery; (c) provider qualifications; (d) participant health and welfare; (e) financial oversight 
and (f) administrative oversight of the waiver. The state further assures that all problems identified through its discovery 
processes are addressed in an appropriate and timely manner, consistent with the severity and nature of the problem. 
During the period that the waiver is in effect, the state will implement the Quality Improvement Strategy specified in 
Appendix H .
H. 
Public Input. Describe how the state secures public input into the development of the waiver:
 
I. 
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 10 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 11]
In reference to the proposed Telehealth Amendment language included under the Additional Needed Information 
(Optional) section of this waiver, on June 30, 2023, DHCS invited all interested entities to review amendment located on 
the HCBS website (https://www.dhcs.ca.gov/services/Pages/HCBSWaiver.aspx) and provide comment via a thirty (30) 
day public comment period. Invitations were sent via the Public Registrar, DHCS Stakeholder Communications and to 
Internal Stakeholder groups. Interested parties were invited to submit comments to the HCBA inbox, 
HCBAlternatives@dhcs.ca.gov.  In addition to the public being able to submit comments electronically through the 
HCBA inbox, the public was able to submit comments through US mail to the address listed below: 
	 Department of Health Care Services 
	 Integrated Systems of Care Division 
	 1501 Capitol Avenue, MS 4502 
	 P.O. Box 997437 
	 Sacramento, CA 95899-7414 
 
The public comment period ended on July 30, 2023. Tribal notice was not necessary for this amendment, as per an email 
correspondence sent to Stephanie Hockman, Coordinator, DHCS Indian Health Program, on June 26, 2023, from Cynthia 
Lemesh, CMS Native American Contact, approving DHCS’ request for No Tribal Notice. 
 
DHCS received a total of 30 Comments from 15 entities regarding the telehealth amendment. Major themes of the 
support and feedback are summarized below: 
•Maintaining health and wellness for persons who utilize these services. 
•Allows Care Coordination Agencies to be more efficient. 
•Safety concerns reduced in travel. Telehealth visits allow for employees to avoid traveling in unsafe conditions such as 
flooding, wildfires, extreme heat and earthquakes. 
•Appointment scheduling convenience 
Additionally, DHCS is providing direct responses to comments received: 
•Comment: Page 16 of 149, point #1: Please be more clear to the reader that in addition to participant preference 
regarding telehealth or in-person services, other conditions/requirements must also be met. Although the paragraph does 
state that all requirements must be met, a waiver participant could understandably become stuck and insist on point #1, 
that they “…MUST [emphasis added] be allowed to choose to receive services, as identified in item #10 below, via 
telehealth or in-person.” 
DHCS Response: The intent is for items #1 through #9 is they must be met for telehealth to be utilized. 
•Comment: Page 16 of 149, point #7: Please clarify what this means for a participant who does not have a DPOA or 
representative, and is otherwise unable to provide consent. Is such a participant ineligible for services provided by 
telehealth? 
DHCS Response: The participant would need to be able to provide consent or have someone legally authorized provide 
consent. 
•Comment: Page 16 of 149, #10: Please define “augmented plan of care development and follow-up, to clarify how this is 
differs from Reassessment. 
10. 	 The following services can be provided via Telehealth, in alignment with the above requirements: 
•Care Coordination 
•Augmented Plan of Care Development and Follow-up 
•NF Transition Care Coordination 
DHCS Response: Augmented plan of care development differs from reassessment as the augmented plan of care 
development is a supplemental assessment of only mental and behavioral health needs. 
•Comment: Page 39 and 65 of 149: Please correct the current discrepancy/ambiguity in the waiver regarding RN position 
qualifications. 
Page 39 of 149: Registered Nurse: “A minimum of 1000 hours of experience in an acute care setting providing nursing 
care to patients with similar care need(s). 2) A minimum of 2000 hours of experience in a home setting(s) providing 
nursing care to patients with the similar care need(s).” 
Page 65 of 149: “Registered Nurse (RN): A RN must have and maintain a current, unsuspended, un-revoked license to 
practice as an RN in California and have work experience that includes either a minimum of 10,000 hours in an acute 
care hospital or a minimum of 2,000 hours of experience in a home health setting 
DHCS Response: The discrepancy and ambiguity regarding Registered Nurse position qualifications will be addressed in 
ALW renewal. 
•Comment: Pages 6, 39, 40, 54, and 80 of 149: As written, the draft document states in multiple places that a social 
worker may complete the ALW assessment/reassessment tool. However, we are very concerned that many of the tool 
elements are outside the social work scope of practice and currently are appropriately completed by a registered nurse, 
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 11 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 12]
consistent with nursing scope of practice and Title 22 regulations regarding level of care determination. Please clarify the 
intent of including the social worker in the assessment and reassessment process and how this is within the social work 
scope of practice. 
Page 6: “A Registered Nurse (RN) or Social Worker with the CCA administers a semiannual (every six months) 
assessment for level of care determination.” 
Page 39: “The CCA must employ a Registered Nurse (RN) or Social Worker to administer the Assessment Tool…” Page 
40: “The CCA RN or social worker performs the reassessments.” [For context: Waiver participants are reassessed every 
six months. The same Assessment Tool is used for the reassessment.”] 
Page 54: “A CCA RN or social worker must conduct the assessment and complete the Assessment Tool.” And “Every six 
months a Care Coordinator RN or social worker will reassess participants…” 
Page 80: “Every six months the CCA RN or social worker will reassess participants…” 
 
DHCS Response: The intent of including social workers in the assessment and reassessment process was to afford social 
workers the opportunity to complete the assessment to ensure timeliness of the initial and reassessment. DHCS 
understands that social workers may need to consult with additional parties to fully complete the assessment to determine 
the level of care. 
DHCS did not make changes to the telehealth amendment in response to public comments.  
Notice to Tribal Governments . The state assures that it has notified in writing all federally-recognized Tribal 
Governments that maintain a primary office and/or majority population within the State of the State's intent to submit a 
Medicaid waiver request or renewal request to CMS at least 60 days before the anticipated submission date is provided by 
Presidential Executive Order 13175 of November 6, 2000. Evidence of the applicable notice is available through the 
Medicaid Agency.
J. 
Limited English Proficient Persons . The state assures that it provides meaningful access to waiver services by Limited 
English Proficient persons in accordance with: (a) Presidential Executive Order 13166 of August 11, 2000 (65 FR 50121) 
and (b) Department of Health and Human Services "Guidance to Federal Financial Assistance Recipients Regarding Title 
VI Prohibition Against National Origin Discrimination Affecting Limited English Proficient Persons" (68 FR 47311 - 
August 8, 2003). Appendix B  describes how the state assures meaningful access to waiver services by Limited English 
Proficient persons.
K. 
7. Contact Person(s)
The Medicaid agency representative with whom CMS should communicate regarding the waiver is:A. 
Last Name:
Cortney
First Name:
Maslyn
Title:
Division Chief, Integrated Systems of Care
Agency:
DHCS
Address:
1501 Capitol Ave.
Address 2:
PO Box 997437
City:
Sacramento
State: California
Zip:
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 12 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 13]
If applicable, the state operating agency representative with whom CMS should communicate regarding the waiver is:B. 
8. Authorizing Signature
This document, together with the attached revisions to the affected components of the waiver, constitutes the state's request to 
amend its approved waiver under §1915(c) of the Social Security Act. The state affirms that it will abide by all provisions of the 
waiver, including the provisions of this amendment when approved by CMS. The state further attests that it will continuously 
operate the waiver in accordance with the assurances specified in Section V and the additional requirements specified in Section 
VI of the approved waiver. The state certifies that additional proposed revisions to the waiver request will be submitted by the 
Medicaid agency in the form of additional waiver amendments.
95899
Phone:
(279) 599-2822  Ext:    TTY
Fax:
(916) 440-5720
E-mail:
Cortney.Maslyn@dhcs.ca.gov
Last Name:
 
First Name:
 
Title:
 
Agency:
 
Address:
 
Address 2:
 
City:
 
State: California
Zip:
 
Phone:
   Ext:    TTY
Fax:
 
E-mail:
 
Signature: MICHELLE BAASS
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 13 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 14]
Attachments
Attachment #1: Transition Plan
Check the box next to any of the following changes from the current approved waiver. Check all boxes that apply.
 Replacing an approved waiver with this waiver.
 Combining waivers.
 Splitting one waiver into two waivers.
 Eliminating a service.
 Adding or decreasing an individual cost limit pertaining to eligibility.
 Adding or decreasing limits to a service or a set of services, as specified in Appendix C.
 Reducing the unduplicated count of participants (Factor C).
 Adding new, or decreasing, a limitation on the number of participants served at any point in time.
 Making any changes that could result in some participants losing eligibility or being transferred to another waiver 
under 1915(c) or another Medicaid authority.
 Making any changes that could result in reduced services to participants.
State Medicaid Director or Designee
Submission Date: Oct 25, 2023
Note: The Signature and Submission Date fields will be automatically completed when the State 
Medicaid Director submits the application.
Last Name:
Baass
First Name:
Michelle
Title:
Director & Interim State Medicaid Director
Agency:
Department of Health Care Services
Address:
1501 Capitol Ave.
Address 2:
MS 0000
City:
Sacramento
State: California
Zip:
95899-7413
Phone:
(916) 440-7400  Ext:    TTY
Fax:
(916) 440-7404
E-mail:
Michelle.baass@dhcs.ca.gov
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 14 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 15]
Specify the transition plan for the waiver:
 
 
 
 
Attachment #2: Home and Community-Based Settings Waiver Transition Plan
Specify the state's process to bring this waiver into compliance with federal home and community-based (HCB) settings 
requirements at 42 CFR 441.301(c)(4)-(5), and associated CMS guidance.
Consult with CMS for instructions before completing this item. This field describes the status of a transition process at the point in 
time of submission. Relevant information in the planning phase will differ from information required to describe attainment of 
milestones.
To the extent that the state has submitted a statewide HCB settings transition plan to CMS, the description in this field may 
reference that statewide plan. The narrative in this field must include enough information to demonstrate that this waiver 
complies with federal HCB settings requirements, including the compliance and transition requirements at 42 CFR 441.301(c)(6), 
and that this submission is consistent with the portions of the statewide HCB settings transition plan that are germane to this 
waiver. Quote or summarize germane portions of the statewide HCB settings transition plan as required.
Note that Appendix C-5 HCB Settings  describes settings that do not require transition; the settings listed there meet federal HCB 
setting requirements as of the date of submission. Do not duplicate that information here.
Update this field and Appendix C-5 when submitting a renewal or amendment to this waiver for other purposes. It is not 
necessary for the state to amend the waiver solely for the purpose of updating this field and Appendix C-5. At the end of the state's 
HCB settings transition process for this waiver, when all waiver settings meet federal HCB setting requirements, enter 
"Completed" in this field, and include in Section C-5 the information on all HCB settings in the waiver.
 
The state assures that this waiver amendment or renewal will be subject to any provisions or requirements included in the state's 
most recent and/or approved home and community-based settings Statewide Transition Plan. The state will implement any 
required changes by the end of the transition period as outlined in the home and community-based settings Statewide Transition 
Plan.  
Additional Needed Information (Optional)
Provide additional needed information for the waiver (optional):
 
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 15 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 16]
Waiver services, as identified in item #10 below, can be provided pursuant to California’s Medi-Cal’s Telehealth Policy, in 
alignment with California Welfare and Institutions Code section 14132.725, and as agreed upon by the applicant, beneficiary, 
legal representative, and provider. All authorized waiver service providers rendering Medi-Cal covered benefits or services under 
this policy must comply with all applicable state and federal laws. Telehealth delivery services must meet HIPAA requirements, 
and the methodology must be accepted by the state’s HIPAA compliance officer. 
Waiver services provided via telehealth must also comply with all of the following requirements: 
1. 	 Participants must be allowed to choose to receive services, as identified in item #10 below, via telehealth or in-person. 
2. 	 Services provided via telehealth must meet the individual’s needs, as included in their person-centered care plan. 
3. 	 The waiver service provider believes that the service being provided via telehealth is clinically appropriate based upon 
evidence-based medicine or best practices or both. Additionally, the telehealth service must meet the procedural definition of the 
Current Procedural Terminology (CPT), or Healthcare Common Procedure Coding System (HCPCS) code associated with the 
service, as well as follow any additional guidance provided by DHCS (e.g., through the DHCS Provider Manual). 
4. 	 Services will only be provided via telehealth if the needs of the beneficiary can be met remotely. Telehealth must not replace 
direct care that can only be provided in-person. If waiver participants’ needs cannot be met via telehealth, in-person assistance is 
required to support the waiver participants’ health and safety. 
5. 	 Services provided via telehealth must be delivered in a way that respects the privacy of the individual, especially in the 
instances of toileting, dressing, etc. 
6. 	 Providing the service via telehealth must not prevent the facilitation of community integration as defined in 42 CFR 
441.301(c)(4). Remotely delivered services can be provided to multiple individuals at one time (without sharing private health 
information), which presents individuals the opportunity to interact with others, while receiving services in their preferred 
delivery method. 
7. 	 The waiver service provider must inform the patient prior to the initial delivery of telehealth services about the use of 
telehealth and obtain consent from the individual for the use of telehealth as an acceptable mode of delivering health care 
services. If personal care is needed while telehealth was being provided, the individual and/or person supporting the individual 
would conduct personal care activities out of the line of sight of the telehealth provider, turn off video/audio communication 
during that time, or reschedule the telehealth visit. If the telehealth includes video cameras and/or monitoring devises, privacy 
must be protected.  In instances where privacy cannot be secured by the individual, the telehealth provider would pause the 
telehealth service until confirming it was appropriate to resume. 
8. 	 Providing the service via telehealth must not impede, replace, or prevent the successful delivery of HCBS for individuals 
who need hands-on assistance/physical assistance. 
9. 	 Support must be provided to individuals who need assistance with using the technology required for the delivery of the 
HCBS via telehealth. The individual’s person-centered planning team is responsible for determining the extent of training 
necessary for the individual to access their services remotely, and for ensuring that the necessary training is provided and 
understood by the individual or legal guardian. Family members may also be eligible for training, as appropriate, to support the 
provision of services if determined to be beneficial for the individual. If the individual is unable to properly utilize the 
technology, with or without assistance, then telehealth is not appropriate. 
10. 	 The following services can be provided via Telehealth, in alignment with the above requirements: 
• Care Coordination 
• Augmented Plan of Care Development and Follow-up 
• NF Transition Care Coordination  
Appendix A: Waiver Administration and Operation
State Line of Authority for Waiver Operation.  Specify the state line of authority for the operation of the waiver ( select 
one ):
 The waiver is operated by the state Medicaid agency.
Specify the Medicaid agency division/unit that has line authority for the operation of the waiver program (select one) :
 The Medical Assistance Unit.
Specify the unit name:  
Integrated Systems of Care Division  
(Do not complete item A-2)
 Another division/unit within the state Medicaid agency that is separate from the Medical Assistance Unit.
Specify the division/unit name. This includes administrations/divisions under the umbrella agency that has been 
1. 
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 16 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 17]
identified as the Single State Medicaid Agency.  
 
 
(Complete item A-2-a).
 The waiver is operated by a separate agency of the state that is not a division/unit of the Medicaid agency.
Specify the division/unit name:  
 
 
In accordance with 42 CFR §431.10, the Medicaid agency exercises administrative discretion in the administration 
and supervision of the waiver and issues policies, rules and regulations related to the waiver. The interagency 
agreement or memorandum of understanding that sets forth the authority and arrangements for this policy is available 
through the Medicaid agency to CMS upon request. (Complete item A-2-b).
Appendix A: Waiver Administration and Operation
Oversight of Performance.
Medicaid Director Oversight of Performance When the Waiver is Operated by another Division/Unit within 
the State Medicaid Agency. When the waiver is operated by another division/administration within the umbrella 
agency designated as the Single State Medicaid Agency. Specify (a) the functions performed by that 
division/administration (i.e., the Developmental Disabilities Administration within the Single State Medicaid 
Agency), (b) the document utilized to outline the roles and responsibilities related to waiver operation, and (c) the 
methods that are employed by the designated State Medicaid Director (in some instances, the head of umbrella 
agency) in the oversight of these activities:
As indicated in section 1 of this appendix, the waiver is not operated by another division/unit within the 
State Medicaid agency. Thus this section does not need to be completed.
 
 
 
a. 
Medicaid Agency Oversight of Operating Agency Performance. When the waiver is not operated by the 
Medicaid agency, specify the functions that are expressly delegated through a memorandum of understanding 
(MOU) or other written document, and indicate the frequency of review and update for that document. Specify the 
methods that the Medicaid agency uses to ensure that the operating agency performs its assigned waiver 
operational and administrative functions in accordance with waiver requirements. Also specify the frequency of 
Medicaid agency assessment of operating agency performance:
As indicated in section 1 of this appendix, the waiver is not operated by a separate agency of the State. Thus 
this section does not need to be completed.
 
 
 
b. 
2. 
Appendix A: Waiver Administration and Operation
Use of Contracted Entities.  Specify whether contracted entities perform waiver operational and administrative functions 
on behalf of the Medicaid agency and/or the operating agency (if applicable) ( select one ):
 Yes. Contracted entities perform waiver operational and administrative functions on behalf of the Medicaid 
agency and/or operating agency (if applicable).
Specify the types of contracted entities and briefly describe the functions that they perform.  Complete Items A-5 and 
A-6.:
 
 
 
3. 
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 17 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 18]
No. Contracted entities do not perform waiver operational and administrative functions on behalf of the 
Medicaid agency and/or the operating agency (if applicable).
Appendix A: Waiver Administration and Operation
Role of Local/Regional Non-State Entities.  Indicate whether local or regional non-state entities perform waiver 
operational and administrative functions and, if so, specify the type of entity ( Select One ):
 Not applicable
 Applicable  - Local/regional non-state agencies perform waiver operational and administrative functions.
Check each that applies:
 Local/Regional non-state public agencies  perform waiver operational and administrative functions at the local 
or regional level. There is an interagency agreement or memorandum of understanding  between the State 
and these agencies that sets forth responsibilities and performance requirements for these agencies that is 
available through the Medicaid agency.
Specify the nature of these agencies and complete items A-5 and A-6:
 
 
 
 Local/Regional non-governmental non-state entities  conduct waiver operational and administrative functions 
at the local or regional level. There is a contract between the Medicaid agency and/or the operating agency 
(when authorized by the Medicaid agency) and each local/regional non-state entity that sets forth the 
responsibilities and performance requirements of the local/regional entity. The contract(s)  under which private 
entities conduct waiver operational functions are available to CMS upon request through the Medicaid agency or 
the operating agency (if applicable).
Specify the nature of these entities and complete items A-5 and A-6:
 
 
 
4. 
Appendix A: Waiver Administration and Operation
Responsibility for Assessment of Performance of Contracted and/or Local/Regional Non-State Entities.  Specify the 
state agency or agencies responsible for assessing the performance of contracted and/or local/regional non-state entities in 
conducting waiver operational and administrative functions:
 
 
 
5. 
Appendix A: Waiver Administration and Operation
Assessment Methods and Frequency. Describe the methods that are used to assess the performance of contracted and/or 
local/regional non-state entities to ensure that they perform assigned waiver operational and administrative functions in 
accordance with waiver requirements. Also specify how frequently the performance of contracted and/or local/regional 
non-state entities is assessed:
 
 
 
6. 
Appendix A: Waiver Administration and Operation
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 18 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 19]
Distribution of Waiver Operational and Administrative Functions.  In the following table, specify the entity or entities 
that have responsibility for conducting each of the waiver operational and administrative functions listed ( check each that 
applies ):
In accordance with 42 CFR §431.10, when the Medicaid agency does not directly conduct a function, it supervises the 
performance of the function and establishes and/or approves policies that affect the function.  All functions not performed 
directly by the Medicaid agency must be delegated in writing and monitored by the Medicaid Agency. Note: More than 
one box may be checked per item. Ensure that Medicaid is checked when the Single State Medicaid Agency (1) conducts 
the function directly; (2) supervises the delegated function; and/or (3) establishes and/or approves policies related to the 
function.
Function Medicaid Agency
Participant waiver enrollment
Waiver enrollment managed against approved limits
Waiver expenditures managed against approved levels
Level of care evaluation
Review of Participant service plans
Prior authorization of waiver services
Utilization management
Qualified provider enrollment
Execution of Medicaid provider agreements
Establishment of a statewide rate methodology
Rules, policies, procedures and information development governing the waiver program
Quality assurance and quality improvement activities
7. 
Appendix A: Waiver Administration and Operation
Quality Improvement: Administrative Authority of the Single State Medicaid 
Agency
As a distinct component of the States quality improvement strategy, provide information in the following fields to detail the States 
methods for discovery and remediation.
Methods for Discovery: Administrative Authority
The Medicaid Agency retains ultimate administrative authority and responsibility for the operation of the waiver 
program by exercising oversight of the performance of waiver functions by other state and local/regional non-state 
agencies (if appropriate) and contracted entities.
Performance Measures
For each performance measure the State will use to assess compliance with the statutory assurance, complete 
the following. Performance measures for administrative authority should not duplicate measures found in other 
appendices of the waiver application.  As necessary and applicable, performance measures should focus on:
Uniformity of development/execution of provider agreements throughout all geographic areas covered by 
the waiver
■
Equitable distribution of waiver openings in all geographic areas covered by the waiver■
Compliance with HCB settings requirements and other new regulatory components (for waiver actions 
submitted on or after March 17, 2014)
■
Where possible, include numerator/denominator.
For each performance measure, provide information on the aggregated data that will enable the State to analyze 
and assess progress toward the performance measure. In this section provide information on the method by which 
each source of data is analyzed statistically/deductively or inductively, how themes are identified or conclusions 
i. 
a. 
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 19 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 20]
drawn, and how recommendations are formulated, where appropriate.
Performance Measure:
Administrative Authority and Oversight: The number of applications received from CCAs 
that received approval by DHCS Numerator: number of applications received from CCAs 
that obtained DHCS approval and resulted in ALW program enrollment. Denominator: 
Total number of applicants enrolled.
Data Source  (Select one):
Other
If 'Other' is selected, specify:
Record reviews, MedCompass
Responsible Party for data 
collection/generation (check 
each that applies):
Frequency of data 
collection/generation (check 
each that applies):
Sampling Approach (check 
each that applies):
 State Medicaid 
Agency
 Weekly  100% Review
 Operating Agency  Monthly  Less than 100% 
Review
 Sub-State Entity  Quarterly  Representative 
Sample
Confidence 
Interval =
 
 
 
 Other
Specify:
 
 
 
 Annually  Stratified
Describe Group:
 
 
 
 Continuously and 
Ongoing
 Other
Specify:
 
 
 
 Other
Specify:
 
 
 
Data Source  (Select one):
Provider performance monitoring
If 'Other' is selected, specify:
Responsible Party for data Frequency of data Sampling Approach (check 
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 20 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 21]
collection/generation (check 
each that applies):
collection/generation (check 
each that applies):
each that applies):
 State Medicaid 
Agency
 Weekly  100% Review
 Operating Agency  Monthly  Less than 100% 
Review
 Sub-State Entity  Quarterly  Representative 
Sample
Confidence 
Interval =
 
 
 
 Other
Specify:
 
 
 
 Annually  Stratified
Describe Group:
 
 
 
 Continuously and 
Ongoing
 Other
Specify:
 
 
 
 Other
Specify:
 
 
 
Data Aggregation and Analysis:
Responsible Party for data aggregation 
and analysis (check each that applies):
Frequency of data aggregation and 
analysis (check each that applies):
 State Medicaid Agency  Weekly
 Operating Agency  Monthly
 Sub-State Entity  Quarterly
 Other
Specify:
 
 
 
 Annually
 Continuously and Ongoing
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 21 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 22]
Responsible Party for data aggregation 
and analysis (check each that applies):
Frequency of data aggregation and 
analysis (check each that applies):
 Other
Specify:
 
 
 
If applicable, in the textbox below provide any necessary additional information on the strategies employed by the 
State to discover/identify problems/issues within the waiver program, including frequency and parties responsible.
 
DHCS conducts continuous and on-going review of the assessments as submitted by the CCAs.  DHCS conducts 
biennial quality assurance visits to the CCAs to verify that the assessments as completed by the CCAs match the 
needs of the participant and are fully implemented. 
 
DHCS conducts the following oversight functions pertaining to CCAs: 
• 	 Provide a folder for each CCA with documentation of waiver requirements for each resident chart. 
• 	 Review current personnel files for each employee. 
• 	 Review CCA Satisfaction Survey Flyer and ask for annual survey results. (QA) 
• 	 Review CCA flyer how/who to report abuse, neglect, exploitation. (QA) 
• 	 Review CCA Staff Annual Training/In Service/Education. 
• 	 Ensure CCA has translated written materials into English, Spanish, and/or threshold language. (QA) 
• 	 Review Serious Incident Reporting with CCA. 
• 	 Review ISP, IN, FOC, Amenity Form, 602 with medication list, 603 with CCA. 
• 	 Review Emergency /Evacuation Plans with CCA. 
• 	 Onsite visits are conducted annually, with the compliance team visiting numerous sites per region.  During 
these onsite reviews, DHCS staff will review facility training with staff, operational and logistic functions, as well 
as additional waiver requirements.  Ad hoc visits will typically be triggered based on Serious Incident Reporting, 
and that will take a precedent over routine annual visits.  Complaints from beneficiaries, as well as CAPs on 
facilities, can also trigger ad hoc reporting, and technical assistance will be provided via onsite visits, and/or 
conference calls depending on the nature of the situation in question.  
ii. 
Methods for Remediation/Fixing Individual Problems
Describe the States method for addressing individual problems as they are discovered. Include information 
regarding responsible parties and GENERAL methods for problem correction. In addition, provide information on 
the methods used by the state to document these items.
 
i. 
b. 
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 22 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 23]
Remediation: 
 
Any non-compliance will result in the DHCS contacting the CCA to: 
   *review the LOC data 
   *determine etiology of non-compliance 
   *develop Corrective Action Plan (CAP) and timeline as appropriate. 
 
Resolution Follow-up: 
   DHCS will: 
     *follow up in writing to determine if the CAP was completed with a successful 
      outcome 
     *monitor the change(s) for continuing compliance 
 
DHCS will conduct a biennial QA audit and generate a report summarizing the data and the findings regarding the 
LOC determinations.  DHCS is responsible for the identification and prioritization of the problems as presented. 
The CCAs are responsible for the remediation of the problems and the efficacy of this process is to document in 
the subsequent assessment submission period.  DHCS will provide further Technical Assistance (TA) to the CCAs 
as required to assure that the remediation occurs and is continuous.  
Remediation Data Aggregation
Remediation-related Data Aggregation and Analysis (including trend identification)
Responsible Party (check each that applies): Frequency of data aggregation and analysis
(check each that applies):
 State Medicaid Agency  Weekly
 Operating Agency  Monthly
 Sub-State Entity  Quarterly
 Other
Specify:
 
 
 
 Annually
 Continuously and Ongoing
 Other
Specify:
 
DHCS will conduct a biennial QA audit. 
DHCS will provide further TA to the 
CCAs to assure remediation occurs and 
is continuous.  
ii. 
Timelines
When the State does not have all elements of the Quality Improvement Strategy in place, provide timelines to design 
methods for discovery and remediation related to the assurance of Administrative Authority that are currently non-
operational.
 No
 Yes
Please provide a detailed strategy for assuring Administrative Authority, the specific timeline for implementing 
identified strategies, and the parties responsible for its operation.
 
 
 
c. 
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 23 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 24]
Appendix B: Participant Access and Eligibility
B-1: Specification of the Waiver Target Group(s)
Target Group(s).  Under the waiver of Section 1902(a)(10)(B) of the Act, the state limits waiver services to one or more 
groups or subgroups of individuals. Please see the instruction manual for specifics regarding age limits. In accordance 
with 42 CFR §441.301(b)(6), select one or more waiver target groups, check each of the subgroups in the selected target 
group(s) that may receive services under the waiver, and specify the minimum and maximum (if any) age of individuals 
served in each subgroup:
Maximum Age
Target Group Included Target SubGroup Minimum Age Maximum Age 
Limit
No Maximum Age 
Limit
 Aged or Disabled, or Both - General
Aged 65  
Disabled (Physical) 21 64   
Disabled (Other) 21 64   
 Aged or Disabled, or Both - Specific Recognized Subgroups
Brain Injury    
HIV/AIDS    
Medically Fragile    
Technology Dependent    
 Intellectual Disability or Developmental Disability, or Both
Autism    
Developmental Disability    
Intellectual Disability    
 Mental Illness
Mental Illness    
Serious Emotional Disturbance       
a. 
Additional Criteria. The state further specifies its target group(s) as follows:
 
Eligible participants for Tiers one through five are determined to be at the Nursing Facility Level A or Nursing Facility 
Level B Level of Care as per the California Code of Regulations (CCR) Sections 51120 (Intermediate Care Services, NF-
A) and 51124 (Skilled Nursing Services NF-B).  
b. 
Transition of Individuals Affected by Maximum Age Limitation. When there is a maximum age limit that applies to 
individuals who may be served in the waiver, describe the transition planning procedures that are undertaken on behalf of 
participants affected by the age limit (select one):
 Not applicable. There is no maximum age limit
 The following transition planning procedures are employed for participants who will reach the waiver's 
maximum age limit.
Specify:
 
c. 
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 24 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 25]
There is no maximum age limit for this waiver. 
 
DHCS is unable to submit the application selecting "Not Applicable".   Appendix B-1-a requires Maximum Age 
Limit to be entered for the disabled subgroup.  
Appendix B: Participant Access and Eligibility
B-2: Individual Cost Limit (1 of 2)
Individual Cost Limit.  The following individual cost limit applies when determining whether to deny home and 
community-based services or entrance to the waiver to an otherwise eligible individual (select one) . Please note that a state 
may have only ONE individual cost limit for the purposes of determining eligibility for the waiver:
 No Cost Limit.  The state does not apply an individual cost limit. Do not complete Item B-2-b or item B-2-c .
 Cost Limit in Excess of Institutional Costs.  The state refuses entrance to the waiver to any otherwise eligible 
individual when the state reasonably expects that the cost of the home and community-based services furnished to 
that individual would exceed the cost of a level of care specified for the waiver up to an amount specified by the state. 
Complete Items B-2-b and B-2-c .
The limit specified by the state is  (select one)
 A level higher than 100% of the institutional average.
Specify the percentage:  
 Other
Specify:
 
 
 
 Institutional Cost Limit.  Pursuant to 42 CFR 441.301(a)(3), the state refuses entrance to the waiver to any otherwise 
eligible individual when the state reasonably expects that the cost of the home and community-based services 
furnished to that individual would exceed 100% of the cost of the level of care specified for the waiver. Complete 
Items B-2-b and B-2-c.
 Cost Limit Lower Than Institutional Costs.  The state refuses entrance to the waiver to any otherwise qualified 
individual when the state reasonably expects that the cost of home and community-based services furnished to that 
individual would exceed the following amount specified by the state that is less than the cost of a level of care 
specified for the waiver.
Specify the basis of the limit, including evidence that the limit is sufficient to assure the health and welfare of waiver 
participants. Complete Items B-2-b and B-2-c.
 
 
 
The cost limit specified by the state is  (select one) :
 The following dollar amount:
Specify dollar amount:  
The dollar amount  (select one)
 Is adjusted each year that the waiver is in effect by applying the following formula:
a. 
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 25 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 26]
Specify the formula:
 
 
 
 May be adjusted during the period the waiver is in effect. The state will submit a waiver 
amendment to CMS to adjust the dollar amount.
 The following percentage that is less than 100% of the institutional average:
Specify percent:  
 Other:
Specify:
 
 
 
Appendix B: Participant Access and Eligibility
B-2: Individual Cost Limit (2 of 2)
Method of Implementation of the Individual Cost Limit.  When an individual cost limit is specified in Item B-2-a, 
specify the procedures that are followed to determine in advance of waiver entrance that the individual's health and welfare 
can be assured within the cost limit:
 
The costs for the ALW services are designed not to exceed the annual sum of the Nursing Facility (NF) rate of 
$76,157.00 plus the estimated state plan costs for persons in the NF setting of $8,000.00.  The rates for the five tiers of 
service, plus the cost of care coordination with the other waiver services, combined, are set to maintain cost neutrality. 
 
CCA RNs or social workers utilize an assessment tool based on the Minimum Data Set (MDS) to score the participant’s 
acuity (tier level) and to identify the services that are required to meet his or her need(s) in an RCFE/ARF. Should the 
participant be determined at any of the tiered levels, and can be maintained safely in the community with the services 
provided through the waiver, the participant is eligible to enroll. 
 
Participants are notified of their right to request a Fair Hearing if enrollment is denied due to the cost limit.  
b. 
Participant Safeguards.  When the state specifies an individual cost limit in Item B-2-a and there is a change in the 
participant's condition or circumstances post-entrance to the waiver that requires the provision of services in an amount 
that exceeds the cost limit in order to assure the participant's health and welfare, the state has established the following 
safeguards to avoid an adverse impact on the participant (check each that applies) :
 The participant is referred to another waiver that can accommodate the individual's needs.
 Additional services in excess of the individual cost limit may be authorized.
Specify the procedures for authorizing additional services, including the amount that may be authorized:
 
c. 
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 26 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 27]
Only the DHCS RN may authorize additional services for individuals with traumatic brain injury or those 
participants who meet all of the following specific criteria: 
 
• Meets NF-A or NF-B Level of Care with severe mental/cognitive disabilities usually as consequence of a traumatic 
brain injury ; 
 
• Demonstrates, has a history of or has the potential of wandering or flight behavior; 
 
• Demonstrates or has a history of an inconsistent ability to provide self-care, potential of injury to self or others, or 
potential of behavior outbursts that negatively affect others; 
 
• Demonstrates or has a history of unsuccessful attempt(s) of placement in other community settings; 
 
• Requires potential 24-hours/seven days per week hands-on or physical presence supervision and management; can 
be left alone for short periods of time; and, 
 
• Only able to reside in a community setting licensed to provide 24-hour services, supervision and supports, 
demonstrated by at least one failed placement in a less restrictive setting. 
 
CCA must document the need for additional services in an Individual Service Plan.  Additional services will be 
authorized at the time DHCS RN reviews and approves each participant's ISP, and DHCS' approval will be 
documented in the ISP. 
 
Note:  Diagnostic criteria will not be used as a determinant of need.  Each individual will be assessed according to 
their needs, not their diagnosis.  
 Other safeguard(s)
Specify:
 
Should a participant develop needs with associated costs that exceed the individual cost limit, the DHCS in 
conjunction with the CCA would work cooperatively with the participant to achieve cost neutrality.  The DHCS will 
assist to determine if there are choices that the participant may exercise to alleviate the excessive costs.  The 
expected goal is to enable the participant to remain enrolled in the waiver. 
 
In the event that the participant is not able to remain within cost neutrality, is being non-compliant with their ISP, 
refuses to pay rent, or jeopardizes the health and well-being of other participants, the DHCS, in conjunction with the 
CCA, would assist to determine alternative placement that would enable the participant to receive the needed care in 
the least restrictive environment.  The decision to relocate would be in conjunction with the participant's wishes, 
consistent with the prescribing physician's orders, and will preserve the health, safety and well-being of the 
participant in the least restrictive setting.  Primary consideration would be given to another waiver program or to 
independent living with IHSS and/or other supportive care.  If all avenues of community placement have been 
exhausted the participant has the choice of nursing facility placement or remaining in community housing without 
waiver services.  
Appendix B: Participant Access and Eligibility
B-3: Number of Individuals Served (1 of 4)
Unduplicated Number of Participants.  The following table specifies the maximum number of unduplicated participants 
who are served in each year that the waiver is in effect. The state will submit a waiver amendment to CMS to modify the 
number of participants specified for any year(s), including when a modification is necessary due to legislative 
appropriation or another reason. The number of unduplicated participants specified in this table is basis for the cost-
neutrality calculations in Appendix J:
Waiver Year Unduplicated Number of Participants
Year 1
Table: B-3-a
a. 
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 27 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 28]
Waiver Year Unduplicated Number of Participants
7409
Year 2 7409
Year 3 9660
Year 4 13050
Year 5 16440
Limitation on the Number of Participants Served at Any Point in Time.  Consistent with the unduplicated number of 
participants specified in Item B-3-a, the state may limit to a lesser number the number of participants who will be served at 
any point in time during a waiver year. Indicate whether the state limits the number of participants in this way: (select one)
:
 The state does not limit the number of participants that it serves at any point in time during a waiver 
year.
 The state limits the number of participants that it serves at any point in time during a waiver year.
The limit that applies to each year of the waiver period is specified in the following table:
Waiver Year Maximum Number of Participants Served 
At Any Point During the Year
Year 1 5744
Year 2 5744
Year 3 7488
Year 4 10116
Year 5 12744
Table: B-3-b
b. 
Appendix B: Participant Access and Eligibility
B-3: Number of Individuals Served (2 of 4)
Reserved Waiver Capacity.  The state may reserve a portion of the participant capacity of the waiver for specified 
purposes (e.g., provide for the community transition of institutionalized persons or furnish waiver services to individuals 
experiencing a crisis) subject to CMS review and approval. The State (select one) :
 Not applicable. The state does not reserve capacity.
 The state reserves capacity for the following purpose(s).
c. 
Appendix B: Participant Access and Eligibility
B-3: Number of Individuals Served (3 of 4)
Scheduled Phase-In or Phase-Out.  Within a waiver year, the state may make the number of participants who are served 
subject to a phase-in or phase-out schedule (select one) :
 The waiver is not subject to a phase-in or a phase-out schedule.
 The waiver is subject to a phase-in or phase-out schedule that is included in Attachment #1 to Appendix 
B-3. This schedule constitutes an intra-year limitation on the number of participants who are served in 
d. 
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 28 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 29]
the waiver.
Allocation of Waiver Capacity.
Select one :
 Waiver capacity is allocated/managed on a statewide basis.
 Waiver capacity is allocated to local/regional non-state entities.
Specify: (a) the entities to which waiver capacity is allocated; (b) the methodology that is used to allocate capacity 
and how often the methodology is reevaluated; and, (c) policies for the reallocation of unused capacity among 
local/regional non-state entities:
 
 
 
e. 
Selection of Entrants to the Waiver.  Specify the policies that apply to the selection of individuals for entrance to the 
waiver:
 
Each waiver participant is determined to be at the NF LOC by the electronically scored Assessment Tool as administered 
by the CCA.  The participant is determined to be at one of the five tiers by the Assessment Tool.  Tier One approximating 
the NF-A LOC, and Tiers Two through Five being gradations of the NF-B LOC. 
 
Enrollment may be prioritized based upon the imminent need for services that is determined through the assessment 
process. New enrollments into the ALW are required to be processed at a ratio of 60% institutional transition to 40% 
community enrollments.  Participant must reside in an institution for at least 60 days prior to qualifying as an institutional 
transition onto the Waiver. An individual requesting ALW services must work with a Care Coordination Agency to 
complete and submit an ALW application to DHCS. If the application is not complete or additional information is 
needed, the application will be deferred. If there are no waiver slots available, applicants who potentially meet the 
waiver’s LOC criteria will be placed on the waitlist. DHCS will then contact the Care Coordination Agency confirming 
the receipt of the application request which will include the effective date of placement on the ALW waitlist.  When a 
waiver slot becomes available, the Care Coordination Agency will be notified and given 60 days to submit a completed 
application to DHCS for review and approval. If a completed application is not received by DHCS within 60 days, the 
open slot will rotate to the next person on the waitlist and the  requestor will be placed at the bottom of the list at their 
request or  removed from the waitlist.  
f. 
Appendix B: Participant Access and Eligibility
B-3: Number of Individuals Served - Attachment #1 (4 of 4)
Answers provided in Appendix B-3-d indicate that you do not need to complete this section.
Appendix B: Participant Access and Eligibility
B-4: Eligibility Groups Served in the Waiver
State Classification.  The state is a (select one) :
 §1634 State
 SSI Criteria State
 209(b) State
1. 
Miller Trust State.
Indicate whether the state is a Miller Trust State (select one) :
 No
2. 
a. 
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 29 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 30]
Yes
Medicaid Eligibility Groups Served in the Waiver.  Individuals who receive services under this waiver are eligible under 
the following eligibility groups contained in the state plan. The state applies all applicable federal financial participation 
limits under the plan. Check all that apply :
Eligibility Groups Served in the Waiver (excluding the special home and community-based waiver group under 42 CFR 
§435.217)
 Low income families with children as provided in §1931 of the Act
 SSI recipients
 Aged, blind or disabled in 209(b) states who are eligible under 42 CFR §435.121
 Optional state supplement recipients
 Optional categorically needy aged and/or disabled individuals who have income at:
Select one :
 100% of the Federal poverty level (FPL)
 % of FPL, which is lower than 100% of FPL.
Specify percentage:  
 Working individuals with disabilities who buy into Medicaid (BBA working disabled group as provided in 
§1902(a)(10)(A)(ii)(XIII)) of the Act)
 Working individuals with disabilities who buy into Medicaid (TWWIIA Basic Coverage Group as provided in 
§1902(a)(10)(A)(ii)(XV) of the Act)
 Working individuals with disabilities who buy into Medicaid (TWWIIA Medical Improvement Coverage 
Group as provided in §1902(a)(10)(A)(ii)(XVI) of the Act)
 Disabled individuals age 18 or younger who would require an institutional level of care (TEFRA 134 eligibility 
group as provided in §1902(e)(3) of the Act)
 Medically needy in 209(b) States (42 CFR §435.330)
 Medically needy in 1634 States and SSI Criteria States (42 CFR §435.320, §435.322 and §435.324)
 Other specified groups (include only statutory/regulatory reference to reflect the additional groups in the state 
plan that may receive services under this waiver)
Specify:
 
Aged, blind, and disabled individuals who may be eligible in any of the following groups even though the groups 
themselves may not be aged blind or disabled eligibility groups: any of the mandatory or optional categorically 
needy programs covered under the State Plan, including anyone who would otherwise be eligible for SSI/SSP as 
provided in the Social Security Act, Section 1902(a)(10)(A)(ii)(I), including those who are eligible under section 
1634(a)(c) and (d). 
 
All other mandatory and optional groups under the Medi-Cal State Plan, who are eligible in alignment with the 
following federal statute and regulations: 1902(a)(10)(A)(ii)(XXII); 1915(i); 1902(a)(10)(A)(ii)(I) and (IV); 
1902(a)(10)(C); 1902(a)(10)(A)(ii)(X), and 1902(m)(1); 1902(a)(10)(A)(i)(I); 1931(b) and (d); 408(a)(11)(A); 
1902(a)(52); 1902(e)(1)(B); 1925; 1931(c)(2); 1902(a)(10)(A)(i)(I); 1902(a)(10)(A)(i)(IX); 1902(a)(10)(A)(i)(III) 
and (IV); 1902(a)(10)(A)(ii)(I), (IV), and (IX); 1931(b) and (d); 1931(c)(1); 1634(c); 1902(a)(10)(A)(ii)(XIII) 
1619(b); 1902(a)(10)(A)(i)(II)(bb); 1905(q); 1902(a)(10)(A)(i)(IV), (VI), and (VII); 1902(a)(10)(A)(ii)(IV); 1931(b) 
and (d); 1902(a)(10)(A)(ii)(XII); 1902(z); 1902(a)(10)(E)(ii); 1905(p)(3)(A)(i); 1905(s) 1902(a)(10)(E)(iii); 
1905(p)(3)(A)(ii); 1902(a)(10)(E)(iv); 1905(p)(3)(A)(ii); 1902(a)(10)(A)(ii)(XXI); 1902(a)(10)(A)(i)(VIII); 
1905z(3); 42 CFR 435.322; 42 CFR 435.320, 322 & 324; 42 CFR 435.115; 42 CFR 435.324; 42 CFR 435.215; 42 
CFR 435.119; 42 CFR 435.320; 43 CFR 435.322 & 324  
b. 
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 30 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 31]
Special home and community-based waiver group under 42 CFR §435.217)  Note: When the special home and 
community-based waiver group under 42 CFR §435.217 is included, Appendix B-5 must be completed
 No.  The state does not furnish waiver services to individuals in the special home and community-based waiver 
group under 42 CFR §435.217.  Appendix B-5 is not submitted.
 Yes.  The state furnishes waiver services to individuals in the special home and community-based waiver group 
under 42 CFR §435.217.
Select one and complete Appendix B-5.
 All individuals in the special home and community-based waiver group under 42 CFR §435.217
 Only the following groups of individuals in the special home and community-based waiver group under 42 
CFR §435.217
Check each that applies :
 A special income level equal to:
Select one :
 300% of the SSI Federal Benefit Rate (FBR)
 A percentage of FBR, which is lower than 300% (42 CFR §435.236)
Specify percentage:  
 A dollar amount which is lower than 300%.
Specify dollar amount:  
 Aged, blind and disabled individuals who meet requirements that are more restrictive than the SSI 
program (42 CFR §435.121)
 Medically needy without spend down in states which also provide Medicaid to recipients of SSI (42 
CFR §435.320, §435.322 and §435.324)
 Medically needy without spend down in 209(b) States (42 CFR §435.330)
 Aged and disabled individuals who have income at:
Select one :
 100% of FPL
 % of FPL, which is lower than 100%.
Specify percentage amount:  
 Other specified groups (include only statutory/regulatory reference to reflect the additional groups in 
the state plan that may receive services under this waiver)
Specify:
 
 
 
Appendix B: Participant Access and Eligibility
B-5: Post-Eligibility Treatment of Income (1 of 7)
In accordance with 42 CFR §441.303(e), Appendix B-5 must be completed when the state furnishes waiver services to individuals 
in the special home and community-based waiver group under 42 CFR §435.217, as indicated in Appendix B-4. Post-eligibility 
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 31 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 32]
applies only to the 42 CFR §435.217 group.
Use of Spousal Impoverishment Rules.  Indicate whether spousal impoverishment rules are used to determine eligibility 
for the special home and community-based waiver group under 42 CFR §435.217:
Note: For the period beginning January 1, 2014 and extending through September 30, 2019 (or other date as required by 
law), the following instructions are mandatory. The following box should be checked for all waivers that furnish waiver 
services to the 42 CFR §435.217 group effective at any point during this time period.
 Spousal impoverishment rules under §1924 of the Act are used to determine the eligibility of individuals with a 
community spouse for the special home and community-based waiver group. In the case of a participant with a 
community spouse, the state uses spousal post-eligibility rules under §1924 of the Act.
Complete Items B-5-e (if the selection for B-4-a-i is SSI State or §1634) or B-5-f (if the selection for B-4-a-i is 209b 
State) and  Item B-5-g unless the state indicates that it also uses spousal post-eligibility rules for the time periods 
before January 1, 2014 or after September 30, 2019 (or other date as required by law).
Note: The following selections apply for the time periods before January 1, 2014 or after September 30, 2019 (or other 
date as required by law) (select one).
 Spousal impoverishment rules under §1924 of the Act are used to determine the eligibility of individuals with a 
community spouse for the special home and community-based waiver group.
In the case of a participant with a community spouse, the state elects to ( select one ):
 Use spousal post-eligibility rules under §1924 of the Act.
(Complete Item B-5-b (SSI State)  and Item B-5-d)
 Use regular post-eligibility rules under 42 CFR §435.726 (SSI State) or under §435.735 (209b State)
(Complete Item B-5-b (SSI State) . Do not complete Item B-5-d)
 Spousal impoverishment rules under §1924 of the Act are not used to determine eligibility of individuals with a 
community spouse for the special home and community-based waiver group. The state uses regular post-
eligibility rules for individuals with a community spouse.
(Complete Item B-5-b (SSI State) . Do not complete Item B-5-d)
a. 
Appendix B: Participant Access and Eligibility
B-5: Post-Eligibility Treatment of Income (2 of 7)
Note: The following selections apply for the time periods before January 1, 2014 or after December 31, 2018.
Regular Post-Eligibility Treatment of Income: SSI State.
The state uses the post-eligibility rules at 42 CFR 435.726 for individuals who do not have a spouse or have a spouse who 
is not a community spouse as specified in §1924 of the Act. Payment for home and community-based waiver services is 
reduced by the amount remaining after deducting the following allowances and expenses from the waiver participant's 
income:
Allowance for the needs of the waiver participant  ( select one ):
 The following standard included under the state plan
Select one :
 SSI standard
 Optional state supplement standard
 Medically needy income standard
 The special income level for institutionalized persons
( select one ):
 300% of the SSI Federal Benefit Rate (FBR)
 A percentage of the FBR, which is less than 300%
i. 
b. 
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 32 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 33]
Specify the percentage:  
 A dollar amount which is less than 300%.
Specify dollar amount:  
 A percentage of the Federal poverty level
Specify percentage:  
 Other standard included under the state Plan
Specify:
 
 
 
 The following dollar amount
Specify dollar amount:    If this amount changes, this item will be revised.
 The following formula is used to determine the needs allowance:
Specify:
 
Total Income, including any income disregarded during the Section 1902(a)(10)(A)(ii)(VI) eligibility 
determination.  
 Other
Specify:
 
 
 
Allowance for the spouse only  ( select one ):
 Not Applicable
 The state provides an allowance for a spouse who does not meet the definition of a community spouse in 
§1924 of the Act. Describe the circumstances under which this allowance is provided:
Specify:
 
 
 
Specify the amount of the allowance  ( select one ):
 SSI standard
 Optional state supplement standard
 Medically needy income standard
 The following dollar amount:
Specify dollar amount:    If this amount changes, this item will be revised.
 The amount is determined using the following formula:
Specify:
ii. 
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 33 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 34]
Allowance for the family  ( select one ):
 Not Applicable (see instructions)
 AFDC need standard
 Medically needy income standard
 The following dollar amount:
Specify dollar amount:    The amount specified cannot exceed the higher of the need standard for a 
family of the same size used to determine eligibility under the state's approved AFDC plan or the medically 
needy income standard established under 42 CFR §435.811 for a family of the same size. If this amount 
changes, this item will be revised.
 The amount is determined using the following formula:
Specify:
 
 
 
 Other
Specify:
 
 
 
iii. 
Amounts for incurred medical or remedial care expenses not subject to payment by a third party, specified 
in 42 §CFR 435.726:
Health insurance premiums, deductibles and co-insurance chargesa. 
Necessary medical or remedial care expenses recognized under state law but not covered under the state's 
Medicaid plan, subject to reasonable limits that the state may establish on the amounts of these expenses.
b. 
Select one:
 Not Applicable (see instructions) Note: If the state protects the maximum amount for the waiver participant, 
not applicable must be selected.
 The state does not establish reasonable limits.
 The state establishes the following reasonable limits
Specify:
 
 
 
iv. 
Appendix B: Participant Access and Eligibility
B-5: Post-Eligibility Treatment of Income (3 of 7)
Note: The following selections apply for the time periods before January 1, 2014 or after December 31, 2018.
Regular Post-Eligibility Treatment of Income: 209(B) State.c. 
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 34 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 35]
Answers provided in Appendix B-4 indicate that you do not need to complete this section and therefore this section 
is not visible.
Appendix B: Participant Access and Eligibility
B-5: Post-Eligibility Treatment of Income (4 of 7)
Note: The following selections apply for the time periods before January 1, 2014 or after December 31, 2018.
Post-Eligibility Treatment of Income Using Spousal Impoverishment Rules
The state uses the post-eligibility rules of §1924(d) of the Act (spousal impoverishment protection) to determine the 
contribution of a participant with a community spouse toward the cost of home and community-based care if it determines 
the individual's eligibility under §1924 of the Act. There is deducted from the participant's monthly income a personal 
needs allowance (as specified below), a community spouse's allowance and a family allowance as specified in the state 
Medicaid Plan. The state must also protect amounts for incurred expenses for medical or remedial care (as specified 
below).
Allowance for the personal needs of the waiver participant
( select one ):
 SSI standard
 Optional state supplement standard
 Medically needy income standard
 The special income level for institutionalized persons
 A percentage of the Federal poverty level
Specify percentage:  
 The following dollar amount:
Specify dollar amount:    If this amount changes, this item will be revised
 The following formula is used to determine the needs allowance:
Specify formula:
 
Total Income, including any income disregarded during the Section 1902(a)(10)(A)(ii)(VI) eligibility 
determination.  
 Other
Specify:
 
 
 
i. 
If the allowance for the personal needs of a waiver participant with a community spouse is different from 
the amount used for the individual's maintenance allowance under 42 CFR §435.726 or 42 CFR §435.735, 
explain why this amount is reasonable to meet the individual's maintenance needs in the community.
Select one:
 Allowance is the same
 Allowance is different.
Explanation of difference:
ii. 
d. 
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 35 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 36]
Amounts for incurred medical or remedial care expenses not subject to payment by a third party, specified 
in 42 CFR §435.726:
Health insurance premiums, deductibles and co-insurance chargesa. 
Necessary medical or remedial care expenses recognized under state law but not covered under the state's 
Medicaid plan, subject to reasonable limits that the state may establish on the amounts of these expenses.
b. 
Select one:
 Not Applicable (see instructions) Note: If the state protects the maximum amount for the waiver participant, 
not applicable must be selected.
 The state does not establish reasonable limits.
 The state uses the same reasonable limits as are used for regular (non-spousal) post-eligibility.
iii. 
Appendix B: Participant Access and Eligibility
B-5: Post-Eligibility Treatment of Income (5 of 7)
Note: The following selections apply for the five-year period beginning January 1, 2014.
Regular Post-Eligibility Treatment of Income: §1634 State  - 2014 through 2018.
Answers provided in Appendix B-5-a indicate that you do not need to complete this section and therefore this 
section is not visible.
e. 
Appendix B: Participant Access and Eligibility
B-5: Post-Eligibility Treatment of Income (6 of 7)
Note: The following selections apply for the five-year period beginning January 1, 2014.
Regular Post-Eligibility Treatment of Income: 209(B) State - 2014 through 2018.
Answers provided in Appendix B-5-a indicate that you do not need to complete this section and therefore this 
section is not visible.
f. 
Appendix B: Participant Access and Eligibility
B-5: Post-Eligibility Treatment of Income (7 of 7)
Note: The following selections apply for the five-year period beginning January 1, 2014.
Post-Eligibility Treatment of Income Using Spousal Impoverishment Rules - 2014 through 2018.
The state uses the post-eligibility rules of §1924(d) of the Act (spousal impoverishment protection) to determine the 
contribution of a participant with a community spouse toward the cost of home and community-based care. There is 
deducted from the participant's monthly income a personal needs allowance (as specified below), a community spouse's 
allowance and a family allowance as specified in the state Medicaid Plan. The state must also protect amounts for incurred 
expenses for medical or remedial care (as specified below).
Answers provided in Appendix B-5-a indicate that you do not need to complete this section and therefore this 
section is not visible.
g. 
Appendix B: Participant Access and Eligibility
B-6: Evaluation/Reevaluation of Level of Care
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 36 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 37]
As specified in 42 CFR §441.302(c), the state provides for an evaluation (and periodic reevaluations) of the need for the level(s) 
of care specified for this waiver, when there is a reasonable indication that an individual may need such services in the near 
future (one month or less), but for the availability of home and community-based waiver services.
Reasonable Indication of Need for Services.  In order for an individual to be determined to need waiver services, an 
individual must require: (a) the provision of at least one waiver service, as documented in the service plan, and  (b) the 
provision of waiver services at least monthly or, if the need for services is less than monthly, the participant requires 
regular monthly monitoring which must be documented in the service plan. Specify the state's policies concerning the 
reasonable indication of the need for services:
Minimum number of services.
The minimum number of waiver services (one or more) that an individual must require in order to be determined to 
need waiver services is: 2
i. 
Frequency of services.  The state requires (select one):
 The provision of waiver services at least monthly
 Monthly monitoring of the individual when services are furnished on a less than monthly basis
If the state also requires a minimum frequency for the provision of waiver services other than monthly (e.g., 
quarterly), specify the frequency:
 
 
 
ii. 
a. 
Responsibility for Performing Evaluations and Reevaluations.  Level of care evaluations and reevaluations are 
performed ( select one ):
 Directly by the Medicaid agency
 By the operating agency specified in Appendix A
 By a government agency under contract with the Medicaid agency.
Specify the entity:
 
 
 
 Other
Specify:
 
 
 
b. 
Qualifications of Individuals Performing Initial Evaluation:  Per 42 CFR §441.303(c)(1), specify the 
educational/professional qualifications of individuals who perform the initial evaluation of level of care for waiver 
applicants:
 
c. 
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 37 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 38]
The CCA must employ a Registered Nurse (RN) or Social Worker to administer the Assessment Tool as developed for 
the ALW and shall be authorized to provide Care Coordination or the additional Service Assessment/Plan of Care 
Development services only when he/she meets the requirements specified below. 
 
Registered Nurse: 
A. 	 Have and maintain a current, unsuspended, un-revoked license to practice as a R.N. in the State of California. 
B. 	 Have work experience that includes at least one of the following: 
1) 	 A minimum of 1000 hours of experience in an acute care setting providing nursing care to patients with similar care 
need(s). 
2) 	 A minimum of 2000 hours of experience in a home setting(s) providing nursing care to patients with the similar care 
need(s). 
 
Social Worker: 
A. 	 Have either a bachelor or master degree in social work, psychology, counseling, rehabilitation, gerontology, 
sociology or a related field of study. 
B. 	 Have one year of related work experience. 
 
 
Complete training on use of the ALW Assessment Tool, the ALW ISP, and training on the Care Coordination Procedures 
Manual as provided by the DHCS. 
 
CCAs are responsible for submitting completed ALW Assessment Tool to Registered Nurses employed by DHCS for 
review and final determination of LOC.  
Level of Care Criteria.  Fully specify the level of care criteria that are used to evaluate and reevaluate whether an 
individual needs services through the waiver and that serve as the basis of the state's level of care instrument/tool. Specify 
the level of care instrument/tool that is employed. State laws, regulations, and policies concerning level of care criteria and 
the level of care instrument/tool are available to CMS upon request through the Medicaid agency or the operating agency 
(if applicable), including the instrument/tool utilized.
 
The LOC criteria are based on the CCR Sections 51120 (Intermediate Care Services, NF-A) and 51124 (Skilled Nursing 
Services NF-B).  Persons eligible for the ALW are determined to meet the LOC by the electronically scored Assessment 
Tool.  
d. 
Level of Care Instrument(s).  Per 42 CFR §441.303(c)(2), indicate whether the instrument/tool used to evaluate level of 
care for the waiver differs from the instrument/tool used to evaluate institutional level of care (select one) :
 The same instrument is used in determining the level of care for the waiver and for institutional care under the 
state Plan.
 A different instrument is used to determine the level of care for the waiver than for institutional care under the 
state plan.
Describe how and why this instrument differs from the form used to evaluate institutional level of care and explain 
how the outcome of the determination is reliable, valid, and fully comparable.
 
The Assessment Tool is based on the Minimum Data Set (MDS) and is designed to facilitate the assessment and 
determination of waiver eligibility by the CCA RN or social worker.  The Assessment Tool is electronically scored 
in an Excel spreadsheet format.  The CCA RN or social worker enters the data and the Assessment Tool 
automatically specifies the tier(s) of service for an eligible participant.  The Assessment Tool was alpha and beta 
tested prior to implementation and was updated to strengthen the validity of the tool.  The Assessment Tool provides 
a consistent determination of waiver eligibility and has demonstrated consistency from user to user. 
 
The Assessment Tool used by ALW is different from the tools used to determine institutional LOC because it is 
designed to determine not only LOC but also a specific tier level exclusive to ALW services and the daily rate that 
will be paid to the RCFE or HHA to provide the necessary daily care.  These tier levels are based on the waiver 
participants care needs.  As care needs change the participant's tier level will change.  
e. 
Process for Level of Care Evaluation/Reevaluation:  Per 42 CFR §441.303(c)(1), describe the process for evaluating 
waiver applicants for their need for the level of care under the waiver. If the reevaluation process differs from the 
f. 
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 38 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 39]
evaluation process, describe the differences:
 
Level of care evaluation/reevaluation process: CCAs conduct assessments and compile the information necessary to 
submit LOC evaluations to the state for final determination. CCAs complete an Assessment Tool that automatically 
tallies a score that identifies the participant’s tier level. Waiver participants are reassessed every six months. The same 
Assessment Tool is used for the reassessment. The DHCS reviews 100% of all assessments and reassessments to make 
the final determination.  
Reevaluation Schedule.  Per 42 CFR §441.303(c)(4), reevaluations of the level of care required by a participant are 
conducted no less frequently than annually according to the following schedule (select one) :
 Every three months
 Every six months
 Every twelve months
 Other schedule
Specify the other schedule:
 
 
 
g. 
Qualifications of Individuals Who Perform Reevaluations.  Specify the qualifications of individuals who perform 
reevaluations (select one) :
 The qualifications of individuals who perform reevaluations are the same as individuals who perform initial 
evaluations.
 The qualifications are different.
Specify the qualifications:
 
 
 
h. 
Procedures to Ensure Timely Reevaluations.  Per 42 CFR §441.303(c)(4), specify the procedures that the state employs 
to ensure timely reevaluations of level of care (specify):
 
The CCA RN or social worker performs the reassessments.  They are allowed 30 days before or after the due date to 
complete the reassessment, and an additional seven days to complete the ISP (commonly referred to as a plan of care) and 
submit all documents to the DHCS. DHCS sends reminders to submit reassessments timely. During the audit process, 
DHCS reviews whether CCAs have been meeting the required reassessment schedule. CCAs will be required to submit a 
Corrective Action Plan if DHCS finds that they are not conducting reassessments timely.  
i. 
Maintenance of Evaluation/Reevaluation Records.  Per 42 CFR §441.303(c)(3), the state assures that written and/or 
electronically retrievable documentation of all evaluations and reevaluations are maintained for a minimum period of 3 
years as required in 45 CFR §92.42. Specify the location(s) where records of evaluations and reevaluations of level of care 
are maintained:
 
All original records are maintained by the CCA for a minimum of ten years.  Copies are retained by the DHCS and the 
RCFE/ARF providers.  
j. 
Appendix B: Evaluation/Reevaluation of Level of Care
Quality Improvement: Level of Care
As a distinct component of the States quality improvement strategy, provide information in the following fields to detail the States 
methods for discovery and remediation.
Methods for Discovery: Level of Care Assurance/Sub-assurancesa. 
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 39 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 40]
The state demonstrates that it implements the processes and instrument(s) specified in its approved waiver for 
evaluating/reevaluating an applicant's/waiver participant's level of care consistent with level of care provided in a 
hospital, NF or ICF/IID.
Sub-Assurances:
Sub-assurance: An evaluation for LOC is provided to all applicants for whom there is reasonable 
indication that services may be needed in the future.
Performance Measures
For each performance measure the State will use to assess compliance with the statutory assurance (or 
sub-assurance), complete the following. Where possible, include numerator/denominator.
For each performance measure, provide information on the aggregated data that will enable the State to 
analyze and assess progress toward the performance measure. In this section provide information on the 
method by which each source of data is analyzed statistically/deductively or inductively, how themes are 
identified or conclusions drawn, and how recommendations are formulated, where appropriate.
Performance Measure:
Initial level of care: the number/percent of new enrollees that received an initial LOC 
determination by CCA RN. Numerator: number of new enrollees with an initial LOC 
completed by RN. Denominator: number of new enrollees
Data Source  (Select one):
Other
If 'Other' is selected, specify:
Record reviews, MedCompass
Responsible Party for 
data 
collection/generation
(check each that applies):
Frequency of data 
collection/generation
(check each that applies):
Sampling Approach
(check each that applies):
 State Medicaid 
Agency
 Weekly  100% Review
 Operating Agency  Monthly  Less than 100% 
Review
 Sub-State Entity  Quarterly  Representative 
Sample
Confidence 
Interval =
 
 
 
 Other
Specify:
 
 
 
 Annually  Stratified
Describe Group:
 
 
 
 Continuously and  Other
a. 
i. 
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 40 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 41]
Ongoing Specify:
 
 
 
 Other
Specify:
 
Every six months  
Data Aggregation and Analysis:
Responsible Party for data 
aggregation and analysis (check each 
that applies):
Frequency of data aggregation and 
analysis (check each that applies):
 State Medicaid Agency  Weekly
 Operating Agency  Monthly
 Sub-State Entity  Quarterly
 Other
Specify:
 
 
 
 Annually
 Continuously and Ongoing
 Other
Specify:
 
 
 
Sub-assurance: The levels of care of enrolled participants are reevaluated at least annually or as 
specified in the approved waiver.
Performance Measures
For each performance measure the State will use to assess compliance with the statutory assurance (or 
sub-assurance), complete the following. Where possible, include numerator/denominator.
For each performance measure, provide information on the aggregated data that will enable the State to 
analyze and assess progress toward the performance measure. In this section provide information on the 
method by which each source of data is analyzed statistically/deductively or inductively, how themes are 
identified or conclusions drawn, and how recommendations are formulated, where appropriate.
b. 
Sub-assurance: The processes and instruments described in the approved waiver are applied c. 
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 41 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 42]
appropriately and according to the approved description to determine participant level of care.
Performance Measures
For each performance measure the State will use to assess compliance with the statutory assurance (or 
sub-assurance), complete the following. Where possible, include numerator/denominator.
For each performance measure, provide information on the aggregated data that will enable the State to 
analyze and assess progress toward the performance measure. In this section provide information on the 
method by which each source of data is analyzed statistically/deductively or inductively, how themes are 
identified or conclusions drawn, and how recommendations are formulated, where appropriate.
Performance Measure:
The assessment processes and instruments described in the approved waiver are 
applied appropriately and according to the approved description to determine 
participant level of care. Numerator: Number of participants with assessment 
processes and instruments applied appropriately. Denominator: Total number of 
participants enrolled.
Data Source  (Select one):
Record reviews, on-site
If 'Other' is selected, specify:
Responsible Party for 
data 
collection/generation
(check each that applies):
Frequency of data 
collection/generation
(check each that applies):
Sampling Approach
(check each that applies):
 State Medicaid 
Agency
 Weekly  100% Review
 Operating Agency  Monthly  Less than 100% 
Review
 Sub-State Entity  Quarterly  Representative 
Sample
Confidence 
Interval =
 
 
 
 Other
Specify:
 
 
 
 Annually  Stratified
Describe Group:
 
 
 
 Continuously and 
Ongoing
 Other
Specify:
 
 
 
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 42 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 43]
Other
Specify:
 
 
 
Data Aggregation and Analysis:
Responsible Party for data 
aggregation and analysis (check each 
that applies):
Frequency of data aggregation and 
analysis (check each that applies):
 State Medicaid Agency  Weekly
 Operating Agency  Monthly
 Sub-State Entity  Quarterly
 Other
Specify:
 
 
 
 Annually
 Continuously and Ongoing
 Other
Specify:
 
 
 
If applicable, in the textbox below provide any necessary additional information on the strategies employed by the 
State to discover/identify problems/issues within the waiver program, including frequency and parties responsible.
 
Discovery: 
Initial - DHCS reviews 100% of the assessments as submitted to ensure that the LOC determination was made. 
DHCS will conduct biennial Quality Assurance audits. DCHS will visit a random sample of enrolled participants 
and review the charts in both the CCA offices and in the RCFE/ARF/PSH settings.  In the event that an 
irregularity or inconsistency is detected with the Assessment Tool, it will be modified and corrected and the 
Assessment Tool Handbook will be updated to reflect the changes and improvements to the Assessment Tool, and 
the CCAs will be provided with training and TA to adopt and implement the revised Tool.  
ii. 
Methods for Remediation/Fixing Individual Problems
Describe the States method for addressing individual problems as they are discovered. Include information 
regarding responsible parties and GENERAL methods for problem correction. In addition, provide information on 
the methods used by the state to document these items.
 
i. 
b. 
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 43 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 44]
Remediation: Within 60 days of discovery, any non-compliance will result in the DHCS contacting the provider 
to: 
  1. review the data 
  2. determine etiology of non-compliance; and 
  3. develop the Corrective Action Plan (CAP) with timeline 
Resolution Follow-up: The DHCS will: 
  1. follow up to determine if the CAP was completed with successful outcome; and 
  2. monitor the change(s) for continuing compliance.  
Remediation Data Aggregation
Remediation-related Data Aggregation and Analysis (including trend identification)
Responsible Party (check each that applies): Frequency of data aggregation and analysis
(check each that applies):
 State Medicaid Agency  Weekly
 Operating Agency  Monthly
 Sub-State Entity  Quarterly
 Other
Specify:
 
 
 
 Annually
 Continuously and Ongoing
 Other
Specify:
 
 
 
ii. 
Timelines
When the State does not have all elements of the Quality Improvement Strategy in place, provide timelines to design 
methods for discovery and remediation related to the assurance of Level of Care that are currently non-operational.
 No
 Yes
Please provide a detailed strategy for assuring Level of Care, the specific timeline for implementing identified 
strategies, and the parties responsible for its operation.
 
 
 
c. 
Appendix B: Participant Access and Eligibility
B-7: Freedom of Choice
Freedom of Choice.  As provided in 42 CFR §441.302(d), when an individual is determined to be likely to require a level of care 
for this waiver, the individual or his or her legal representative is:
informed of any feasible alternatives under the waiver; andi. 
given the choice of either institutional or home and community-based services.ii. 
Procedures.  Specify the state's procedures for informing eligible individuals (or their legal representatives) of the feasible 
alternatives available under the waiver and allowing these individuals to choose either institutional or waiver services. 
a. 
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 44 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 45]
Identify the form(s) that are employed to document freedom of choice. The form or forms are available to CMS upon 
request through the Medicaid agency or the operating agency (if applicable).
 
The CCA provide the participant with the choices available to them in lieu of the ALW.  The participant signs the 
Freedom of Choice document indicating his or her choice of the ALW as the preferred option for the delivery of services. 
The participant has the right to decline the waiver services at any time.  
Maintenance of Forms.  Per 45 CFR §92.42, written copies or electronically retrievable facsimiles of Freedom of Choice 
forms are maintained for a minimum of three years. Specify the locations where copies of these forms are maintained.
 
The original is maintained by the CCA and the DHCS is provided with a copy at the time of initial authorization of 
services.  
b. 
Appendix B: Participant Access and Eligibility
B-8: Access to Services by Limited English Proficiency Persons
Access to Services by Limited English Proficient Persons.  Specify the methods that the state uses to provide meaningful access 
to the waiver by Limited English Proficient persons in accordance with the Department of Health and Human Services "Guidance 
to Federal Financial Assistance Recipients Regarding Title VI Prohibition Against National Origin Discrimination Affecting 
Limited English Proficient Persons"  (68 FR 47311 - August 8, 2003):
 
DHCS employs several methods to ensure meaningful access to waiver services by Limited English Proficient (LEP) individuals, 
in accordance with §50514 of the Health and Safety Code and §10746 of the Welfare and Institution (W&I) Code. 
 
Participating waiver providers are required to provide both interpreter and translation services for applicants and participants in 
the Medi-Cal threshold languages most commonly encountered in that county. Threshold languages differ by county and are 
identified by DHCS at the following link: 
https://www.dhcs.ca.gov/dataandstats/statistics/Pages/RASD_Enrollment_by_Geographic_Region.aspx. A “threshold” is defined 
as 3,000 beneficiaries or 5% of the Medi-Cal population within a county (whichever is lower) whose primary language is other 
than English. 
 
Language services shall be provided in compliance with the Code of Federal Regulations, Title 45, section 92.201, and any other 
applicable federal or state laws or regulations. 
 
DHCS will furnish participating counties and waiver providers with translated written materials in English and Spanish, as well 
as threshold languages most commonly encountered in the county.  
Appendix C: Participant Services
C-1: Summary of Services Covered (1 of 2)
Waiver Services Summary. List the services that are furnished under the waiver in the following table. If case 
management is not a service under the waiver, complete items C-1-b and C-1-c:
Service Type Service
Statutory Service Assisted Living Services - Homemaker; Home Health Aide; Personal Care
Statutory Service Care Coordination
Statutory Service Residential Habilitation
Other Service Augmented Plan of Care Development and Follow-up
Other Service NF Transition Care Coordination
a. 
Appendix C: Participant Services
C-1/C-3: Service Specification
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 45 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 46]
State laws, regulations and policies referenced in the specification are readily available to CMS upon request through 
the Medicaid agency or the operating agency (if applicable).
Service Type:
Statutory Service
Service:
Homemaker
Alternate Service Title (if any):
 
Assisted Living Services - Homemaker;  Home Health Aide;  Personal Care  
HCBS Taxonomy:
Service Definition  (Scope):
 
Category 1:
 
Sub-Category 1:
 
Category 2:
 
Sub-Category 2:
 
Category 3:
 
Sub-Category 3:
 
Category 4:
 
Sub-Category 4:
 
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 46 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 47]
The following is a list of services provided or coordinated by either the RCFE/ARF waiver provider or HHA waiver 
provider for participants residing in Public Subsidized Housing (PSH): 
 
• 	 24-hour awake staff to provide oversight and meet the scheduled and unscheduled needs (Provision of awake 
staff at night is waived in 6-bed RCFE/ARFs as per CCL); 
 
• 	 Provision and oversight of personal and supportive services including assistance with ADLs and IADLs; 
 
• 	 Assistance with self-administration of medications and/or administration by licensed nursing staff as needed; 
 
• 	 Recreational activities (Referral to recreational activities in a PSH setting); 
 
• 	 Provision of three meals per day plus snacks in the RCFE/ARF setting; or, 
 
• 	 Coordination of three meals and snacks in a PSH setting; 
 
• 	 Housekeeping and laundry (Participant provides cleaning products and coins for laundry equipment); 
 
• 	 Licensed nursing staff, as necessary, to meet the skilled nursing needs of the participants. This does not include 
24-hour skilled nursing care or continuous skilled nursing supervision. 
 
• 	 Transportation, or arrangement of transportation, to medically necessary appointments and to other needed 
services as identified on the ISP.  The use of public transportation, when safe and appropriate, is an option. 
 
• 	 An IRS is required in the PSH setting. An IRS is a 24-hour call system that enables participants to secure 
immediate assistance in the event of an emotional, physical or environmental emergency. The IRS is designed to 
meet the needs and abilities of participants.  The IRS may be a 24-hour response system, paging or intercom system. 
 
Accommodations that must be available in ALW settings include: 
 
• 	 Private or shared bedroom with lockable door in an RCFE/ARF. A shared bedroom shall have no more than two 
residents, maximum; 
 
• 	 Private occupancy in PSH with doors that lock, unless sharing is the participant's preference. (The choice of a 
housemate or roommate is independent of the ALW 
 
• 	 Private or semi-private bathroom in an RCFE/ARF or private full bathroom in PSH; There must be adequate 
bathroom space for the privacy and dignity of the participants when bathrooms are semi-private. This requirement 
shall not prevent an RCFE from developing or using a centralized shower designed to better accommodate residents 
with disabilities or to better allow for staff assistance with a resident’s shower; 
 
 
• 	 Shared common space, such as a dining room or common activities center that may also serve as a dining room; 
 
• 	 Kitchenette, equipped with a refrigerator, a microwave (or cooking appliance in PSH) and storage space for 
utensils and supplies if participants do not have access to a common kitchen area at all times. The kitchenette 
requirement is waived if use of the kitchenettes is not allowed under the relevant licensure regulations for 
Residential Care Facilities for the Elderly. 
 
 
• 	 PSH sites must have space sufficient for an HHA to operate a workspace with lockable doors and a telephone 
line; 
 
• 	 PSH sites must allow building access to identified employees for the purpose of rendering the ALW benefit. 
 
• 	 Note: These services do NOT include the cost of rent or the purchase of food. 
 
 
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 47 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 48]
Assisted Living Services will be delivered to participants in one of five possible "tiers" of service.  Participants will 
be assigned an ALW tier as determined by the Care Coordination Agency RN.  ALW Assessment Tool is 
administered by the CCA RN to potential, new participants to the waiver, and repeated at each reassessment.  The 
tool measures the need for assistance with ADLs, IADLs and the need for assistance in one or more of the seven (7) 
functional categories: Cognitive Patterns, Behavioral Symptoms, Continence, Communications, Medications, Skin 
Conditions, or Other Treatments.  Based on the combined need for assistance in these areas, the tool calculates a 
LOC eligibility and tier of service for the participant. 
 
• Tier one services will be assigned to participants with the lowest level of support need; 
 
• Tier two, tier three, and tier four services will be assigned to participants with more significant support needs, 
respectively; 
  and; 
 
• Tier five services will be assigned to participants who require intense, focused attention to ADLs and IADLs as a 
result of a severe traumatic brain injury.  These participants will have a need for assistance beyond that provided in 
Tiers one through four along with the additional residential habilitation services to successfully manage their care 
needs while residing in either an RCFE/ARF or PSH.  Tier five is designed to provide a community residential 
alternative for participants whose physical, mental and cognitive disabilities make placement in other facilities, such 
as SNFs, IMDs, ICF/DDs or in Tiers one through four of the ALW inappropriate or unmanageable.  To be eligible 
for Tier five, participants must demonstrate one or more failed placements in the past, and demonstrate that they can 
successfully reside in a supervised community setting.  Tier five provides extensive physical, behavioral, cognitive, 
communicative, social and psychosocial treatments and supervision for those ALW-eligible participants with care 
needs typical of severe traumatic brain injury. 
 
To be eligible for Tier five services a participant must have suffered a traumatic brain injury and meet all of the 
following specific criteria: 
 
• Meets NF-A or NF-B LOC with severe mental/cognitive disabilities; 
 
• Demonstrates, has a history of or has the potential of wandering or flight behavior; 
 
• Demonstrates or has a history of an inconsistent ability to provide self-care, potential or injury to self or others, or 
potential of behavior outbursts that negatively affect others; 
 
• Demonstrates or has a history of unsuccessful attempts(s) of placement in other community settings; 
 
• Requires potential 24-hours/seven days per week hands-on or physical presence supervision and management; can 
be left alone for short periods of time; and, 
 
• Only able to reside in a community setting licensed to provide 24-hour services, supervision and supports, 
demonstrated by at least one failed placement in a less restrictive setting. 
 
Assisted Living Services, as all ALW benefits, will be delivered in accordance with an ISP.  The ISP is based on the 
needs identified by the CCA RN via the ALW Assessment Tool, clinical records, professional assessments and the 
personal preferences of the participant. 
 
The participant takes part in the development of the ISP to the full extent possible.  Participants who are unable to 
participate in the development of their own ISP may be assisted by a family member or other responsible party, such 
as a legal conservator.  The person(s) responsible for a participant's health care decisions may fill the lead role in 
plan development and oversight in collaboration with the provider and the CCA as necessary. 
 
Assisted Living Services includes personal care services (including assistance with ADLs and IADLs as needed), 
chore services, companion services, medication oversight, and therapeutic social and recreational programming 
provided in a home-like environment.  This service includes 24-hour on-site direct care staff to meet scheduled or 
unpredictable needs in a way that promotes maximum dignity and independence, and to provide supervision, safety, 
and security. 
 
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 48 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 49]
Assisted Living Services include personalized care, available 24-hours per day rendered by onsite staff.  Direct care 
staff will be awake and available at all times.  An exception to the requirement of awake staff at night is granted to 
RCFE/ARFs with a licensed capacity of fewer than seven beds.  In RCFE/ARFs with a licensed capacity of fewer 
than seven beds, direct care staff must be available on the immediate premises but are not required to remain awake 
throughout the night.  Assisted Living Services are furnished to participants who reside in private or semi-private 
residency units which may be shared at the participant's request but not as a requirement of program participation. 
The ISP will reflect the choice of the participant to share a residence.  The participant has a right to privacy. 
Residences may be locked at the discretion of the participant, except when a physician or mental health professional 
has certified in writing that the participant is sufficiently cognitively impaired as to be a danger to self or others if 
given the opportunity to lock the door.  (This requirement does not apply where it conflicts with fire code).  Each 
residence is separate and distinct from the other.  
Specify applicable (if any) limits on the amount, frequency, or duration of this service:
 
 
 
Service Delivery Method (check each that applies) :
 Participant-directed as specified in Appendix E
 Provider managed
Specify whether the service may be provided by (check each that applies) :
 Legally Responsible Person
 Relative
 Legal Guardian
Provider Specifications:
Provider Category Provider Type Title
Agency Home Health Agencies (HHAs) in Publicly Subsidized Housing (PSH) Settings
Agency Adult Residential Facility (ARF)
Agency Residential Care Facility for the Elderly (RCFE)
Appendix C: Participant Services
C-1/C-3: Provider Specifications for Service
Service Type: Statutory Service
Service Name: Assisted Living Services - Homemaker; Home Health Aide; Personal Care
Provider Category:
Agency
Provider Type:
 
Home Health Agencies (HHAs) in Publicly Subsidized Housing (PSH) Settings  
Provider Qualifications
License (specify):
 
HHA Title 22, §§74659 et seq.  
Certificate (specify):
 
CHHA BPC §§1736.1-1736.6  
Other Standard (specify):
 
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 49 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 50]
In PSH residences, Assisted Living Services are provided by Medi-Cal licensed Home Health Agencies 
(HHAs).  \ 
 
All HHAs must: 
1. Possess a State of California business license, be licensed as a Home Health Agency in California, and 
be certified as a Medi-Cal provider of home health services. 
2. Be in substantial compliance with all licensing regulations and in good standing with the licensing 
agency.  
Verification of Provider Qualifications
Entity Responsible for Verification:
 
DPH Licensing and Certification  
Frequency of Verification:
 
Annually  
Appendix C: Participant Services
C-1/C-3: Provider Specifications for Service
Service Type: Statutory Service
Service Name: Assisted Living Services - Homemaker; Home Health Aide; Personal Care
Provider Category:
Agency
Provider Type:
 
Adult Residential Facility (ARF)  
Provider Qualifications
License (specify):
 
ARFs must meet licensure and certification requirements set forth by the CCL.  Participating ARFs must 
be in substantial compliance and good standing with licensing regulations (Ref: Title 22 – Division 6 – 
Chapter 6 – Adult Residential Facilities). ARFs that are on probation with and/or have pending 
accusation against the licensee are not in substantial compliance for the purpose of the ALW. (Ref. H&S 
§ 1569.33). Prior to the CAP being lifted, the facility and their affiliates, must be in substantial 
compliance with licensing and regulations, and in good standing with the corresponding licensing 
agency, with full power and authority to carry on its business as such business is now conducted and as 
proposed to be conducted.  DHCS reserves the right as the single-state Medicaid Agency to utilize 
findings from the CCL as a means to incorporate deficiencies of the ARFs.  
Certificate (specify):
 
 
 
Other Standard (specify):
 
DHCS maintains an active list of RCFRCFE/ARF applicants and providers that is provided to CCL for 
review and consideration of facility status.  CCL notifies the DHCS of any change in provider status for 
waiver providers. 
 
Individual RNs and social workers are not provider types that are authorized directly through the ALW 
but, a qualified RN or social worker may be contracted or hired by the RCFRCFE/ARF to provide 
necessary services to participants based on the participant’s individual service plan.  Individual RNs and 
social workers may decide to operate as a business to provide ALW services as a CCA provider.  
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 50 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 51]
Verification of Provider Qualifications
Entity Responsible for Verification:
 
CDSS CCL  
Frequency of Verification:
 
Annual  
Appendix C: Participant Services
C-1/C-3: Provider Specifications for Service
Service Type: Statutory Service
Service Name: Assisted Living Services - Homemaker; Home Health Aide; Personal Care
Provider Category:
Agency
Provider Type:
 
Residential Care Facility for the Elderly (RCFE)  
Provider Qualifications
License (specify):
 
RCFs must meet licensure and certification requirements set forth by the CCL.  Participating RCFs must 
be in substantial compliance and good standing with licensing regulations (Ref: Title 22, § 87101(s)(9)). 
RCFs that are on probation with and/or have pending accusation against the licensee are not in 
substantial compliance for the purpose of the ALW. (Ref. H&S § 1569.33).  
Certificate (specify):
 
 
 
Other Standard (specify):
 
DHCS maintains an active list of RCF applicants and providers that is provided to CCL for review and 
consideration of facility status.  CCL notifies the DHCS of any change in provider status for waiver 
providers. 
 
Individual RNs and social workers are not provider types that are authorized directly through the ALW 
but, a qualified RN or social worker may be contracted or hired by the RCF to provide necessary 
services to participants based on the participant’s individual service plan.  Individual RNs and social 
workers may decide to operate as a business to provide ALW services as a CCA provider.  
Verification of Provider Qualifications
Entity Responsible for Verification:
 
CDSS CCL  
Frequency of Verification:
 
Annual  
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 51 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 52]
Appendix C: Participant Services
C-1/C-3: Service Specification
State laws, regulations and policies referenced in the specification are readily available to CMS upon request through 
the Medicaid agency or the operating agency (if applicable).
Service Type:
Statutory Service
Service:
Case Management
Alternate Service Title (if any):
 
Care Coordination  
HCBS Taxonomy:
Service Definition  (Scope):
 
Category 1:
 
Sub-Category 1:
 
Category 2:
 
Sub-Category 2:
 
Category 3:
 
Sub-Category 3:
 
Category 4:
 
Sub-Category 4:
 
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 52 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 53]
Care Coordinators assist participants in gaining access to needed waiver and other state plan services.  In 
collaboration with participants and/or their families, the Care Coordinators will complete the assessment and 
reassessment of waiver participants using the ALW Assessment Tool, at least every six months, and more 
frequently, as indicated by a change in the condition of the participant.  A CCA RN or social worker must conduct 
the assessment and complete the Assessment Tool.  Care Coordinators must also verify Medi-Cal eligibility.  Care 
Coordinators will assist participants in the direct development, implementation, and modification of their ISP to the 
extent that the participant desires to be involved.  Participants who are unable to direct the development of their own 
ISP and participate in the oversight of their own services may be assisted by a family member or other responsible 
party, such as a legal conservator.  The person(s) responsible for a participant's health care decisions may fill the 
lead role in plan development and oversight in collaboration with the Care Coordinator as necessary. 
 
The ISP is a plan describing the services rendered to the participant, the manner in which the services are delivered, 
and the desired outcome for each service.  The ISP must include specification of the type of provider performing 
each service and the frequency and duration of each service.  Participants may choose to be involved in all aspects of 
the design, delivery, and modification of their services.  They have the right to decide when services are delivered, 
where services are delivered and how services are delivered. 
 
The Care Coordinator will ensure that the ISP is completed during the initial meeting and reviewed (and updated as 
needed) every six months.  On an ongoing basis, Care Coordinators, in collaboration with participants, will also be 
responsible for ensuring the appropriate, timely delivery of needed services.  This will be achieved through face-to-
face meetings with the participant and/or responsible parties every month, and a review of participant records at each 
six-month reassessment.  Participants may request a review of their ISP at any time.  The Care Coordinator 
assessments and determinations of Medi-Cal eligibility are subject to verification by the DHCS.  Every six months a 
Care Coordinator RN or social worker will reassess participants and determine with the participant what, if any, 
updates need to be made to the ISP.  The Care Coordinator will assess the participants for health and safety.  Any 
signs of abuse or neglect will be reported immediately to Adult Protective Services (APS), and the DHCS. 
Depending on whether the participant is residing in an RCFE/ARF or PSH, CCL or DPH L&C will also be notified. 
 
Participants will be enrolled into the ALW upon completion of the Assessment, verification of eligibility and 
completion of the Freedom of Choice Document.  The Care Coordinator is eligible to submit bills for Care 
Coordination once the participant is enrolled.  A participant can only be enrolled into the waiver after having been 
transitioned into an assisted living community residence. 
 
The participant may choose to receive Care Coordination services either via telehealth or in-person.  When provided 
via telehealth, the service must be provided in accordance with the telehealth assurances described under Main. 
Optional Additional Needed Information.  
Specify applicable (if any) limits on the amount, frequency, or duration of this service:
 
Care Coordination is on-going for the duration of time the participant is enrolled in the waiver.  If a participant 
leaves the assisted living setting due to hospitalization, etc…the CCA will continue to advocate for the participant 
for up to thirty days for the purpose of coordinating the participant returning to the assisted living setting.  If the 
participant is unable to return after 30 days, the participant will be disenrolled from the ALW.  The participant 
retains the unduplicated slot for 60 days to facilitate subsequent return to the ALW.  After 60 days, the slot is 
available to another participant. 
 
The emphasis of the ALW is the successful transition of persons from skilled nursing into assisted living based on 
freedom of choice.  The goal is for the CCAs to coordinate at least one NF transition for every one community 
placement they coordinate. 
 
The CCAs will work in conjunction with the Money Follows the Person (MFP) program, known in California as 
California Community Transitions (CCT) to assist with the successful placement of persons identified by CCT who 
choose the ALW.  The CCAs will consider the placement of a CCT individual as a qualifying NF transition.  The 
CCT Operational Protocol recognizes the PSH sites as an appropriate placement.  Should a participant in the CCT 
demonstration choose to reside in an RCFE/ARF, the CCT demonstration would refer the participant to a CCA for 
enrollment in the ALW.  
Service Delivery Method (check each that applies) :
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 53 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 54]
Participant-directed as specified in Appendix E
 Provider managed
Specify whether the service may be provided by (check each that applies) :
 Legally Responsible Person
 Relative
 Legal Guardian
Provider Specifications:
Provider Category Provider Type Title
Agency Care Coordinator Agency (CCA)
Appendix C: Participant Services
C-1/C-3: Provider Specifications for Service
Service Type: Statutory Service
Service Name: Care Coordination
Provider Category:
Agency
Provider Type:
 
Care Coordinator Agency (CCA)  
Provider Qualifications
License (specify):
 
Business License  
Certificate (specify):
 
 
 
Other Standard (specify):
 
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 54 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 55]
Care Coordination Agency 
Minimum Requirements for Care Coordination Agency (CCA) 
Agency Experience and Staff Requirements 
 
A Care Coordination Agency must employ the following staff with the required years of experience 
providing care coordination, which includes the following activities:  conducting assessments, 
developing care plans, arranging for and monitoring service delivery, maintaining progress notes and 
case records, conducting quality assurance reviews, and collecting data. 
 
Registered Nurse (RN): 
A RN must have and maintain a current, unsuspended, un-revoked license to practice as an RN in 
California and have work experience that includes either a minimum of 10,000 hours in an acute care 
hospital or a minimum of 2,000 hours of experience in a home health setting. 
 
Individual RNs and social workers are not provider types that are authorized directly through the ALW 
but, a qualified RN or social worker may be contracted or hired by the RCFE to provide necessary 
services to participants based on the participant’s individual service plan.  Individual RNs and social 
workers may decide to operate as a business to provide ALW services as a CCA provider. 
 
A Social Worker must have either a bachelor or master degree in social work, psychology, counseling, 
rehabilitation, gerontology, or sociology plus one year of related work experience. 
 
Agencies must have mandatory in-service training programs for their staff. 
Agencies must have a process for soliciting and/or obtaining feedback from clients regarding their 
satisfaction with service. 
Agencies must have a quality assurance program to track client complaints and incident reports. 
Agencies must maintain a service record for each client.  At a minimum, the record must contain all 
required forms, completed assessments, signed care plans (ISPs), and progress notes.  Agencies must 
agree to make these records available to DHCS for audit. 
 
Agencies must have contingency plans to deliver services in the event of a disaster or emergency. 
Staff must agree to collect data as specified.  
Verification of Provider Qualifications
Entity Responsible for Verification:
 
DHCS upon application as an ALW provider and during annual review  
Frequency of Verification:
 
Annually  
Appendix C: Participant Services
C-1/C-3: Service Specification
State laws, regulations and policies referenced in the specification are readily available to CMS upon request through 
the Medicaid agency or the operating agency (if applicable).
Service Type:
Statutory Service
Service:
Residential Habilitation
Alternate Service Title (if any):
 
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 55 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 56]
Residential Habilitation  
HCBS Taxonomy:
Service Definition  (Scope):
 
Residential habilitation provides for additional staff with additional training to deliver a more constant and 
concentrated effort, on a one to one staff ratio, involving the addition of specialized behavior modification 
techniques.  The focus is more toward a participant’s safety and well-being when interacting with participants who 
“act out,” or display violent or self-destructive behaviors, and destructive behaviors toward other individuals. 
 
The residential habilitation service includes assistance with ADLs, but with the focus of overseeing the behavioral 
issues requiring a constant and concentrated effort for up to 24 hours per day, 7 days a week involving the addition 
of the specialized behavior modification techniques related to such issues as TBI.  Provision of this service requires 
prior approval from DHCS Registered Nurses to allow additional, appropriate staff to focus individual attention on 
one participant to assist in acquiring, retaining and improving the self-help, socialization and adaptive skills while 
concentrating on helping them to control their behavior issues that would otherwise preclude them from living in a 
community setting.  Providers will be reimbursed for supplying additional, appropriate staff to oversee a participant, 
depending on an individual’s unique needs.  Staff may be licensed medical staff, personal or nursing aides, security 
personnel, or other specialties as appropriate to the specific participant.  Staff must have had a minimum of two 
hours of documented approved education, specific to TBI and a minimum of two hours of documented approved 
continuing education per year thereafter. 
 
Specific services are an intensive form of those specified under the Assisted Living Services and specifically aimed 
at those participants who require more staff and more intense focus on the activity and the participant's safety and 
well-being than that anticipated for the participant receiving routine assisted living services.  Services may include: 
 
• 	 Hands-on assistance with ADLs such that the participant is guided to become more self-reliant; such enhanced 
assistance is anticipated to take up to twice as long as that provided to those participants receiving routine assisted 
living services. 
 
• 	 In-person, eyes-on supervision/protective supervision to redirect the participant away from wandering, acting out 
behaviors, violent behaviors, self-destructive or other person-destructive behaviors. 
 
• 	 Such oversight is expected to require staff that is assigned a limited number of participants for an extended time. 
 
Residential habilitation services are available to participants residing in both an RCFE/ARF and a PSH.  Residential 
Habilitation Services will be provided by the home health agency in addition to regular Assisted Living Services to 
participants residing in PSH settings.  
Specify applicable (if any) limits on the amount, frequency, or duration of this service:
 
Category 1:
 
Sub-Category 1:
 
Category 2:
 
Sub-Category 2:
 
Category 3:
 
Sub-Category 3:
 
Category 4:
 
Sub-Category 4:
 
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 56 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 57]
Reimbursed per 15 minute increments, based on prior authorization as outlined on the ISP for the amount of time 
needed for the specific participant.  Providers may bill a maximum of 24 hours per day (96 units).  
Service Delivery Method (check each that applies) :
 Participant-directed as specified in Appendix E
 Provider managed
Specify whether the service may be provided by (check each that applies) :
 Legally Responsible Person
 Relative
 Legal Guardian
Provider Specifications:
Provider Category Provider Type Title
Agency PSH - HHA
Agency ARF
Agency RCFE
Appendix C: Participant Services
C-1/C-3: Provider Specifications for Service
Service Type: Statutory Service
Service Name: Residential Habilitation
Provider Category:
Agency
Provider Type:
 
PSH - HHA  
Provider Qualifications
License (specify):
 
CA Dept. of Public Health (CDPH) issued HHA license.  
Certificate (specify):
 
Medi-Cal certified provider.  
Other Standard (specify):
 
In PSH residences, Assisted Living Services are provided by Medi-Cal licensed Home Health Agencies 
(HHAs). 
 
A PSH-HHA must: 
1. Possess a State of California business license, be licensed as a Home Health Agency in California, and 
be certified as a Medi-Cal provider of home health and ALW services. 
 
2.Be in substantial compliance with all licensing regulations and in good standing with the licensing 
agency.  
Verification of Provider Qualifications
Entity Responsible for Verification:
 
CDPH L&C  
Frequency of Verification:
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 57 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 58]
Annually  
Appendix C: Participant Services
C-1/C-3: Provider Specifications for Service
Service Type: Statutory Service
Service Name: Residential Habilitation
Provider Category:
Agency
Provider Type:
 
ARF
 
Provider Qualifications
License (specify):
 
ARFs must meet licensure and certification requirements set forth by the CCL.  Participating ARFs must 
be in substantial compliance and good standing with licensing regulations (Ref: Title 22,Division 
6,Chapter 6-Adult Residential Facilities). ARFs that are on probation with and/or have pending 
accusation against the licensee are not in substantial compliance for the purpose of the ALW. (Ref. H&S 
§ 1569.33). Prior to the CAP being lifted, the facility and their affiliates, must be in substantial 
compliance with licensing and regulations, and in good standing with the corresponding licensing 
agency, with full power and authority to carry on its business as such business is now conducted and as 
proposed to be conducted.  DHCS reserves the right as the single-state Medicaid Agency to utilize 
findings from the CCL as a means to incorporate deficiencies of the ARFs.  
Certificate (specify):
 
 
 
Other Standard (specify):
 
DHCS maintains an active list of ARF applicants and providers that is provided to CCL for review and 
consideration of facility status.  CCL notifies the DHCS of any change in provider status for waiver 
providers. 
 
Individual RNs and social workers are not provider types that are authorized directly through the ALW 
but, a qualified RN or social worker may be contracted or hired by the ARF to provide necessary 
services to participants based on the participant’s individual service plan.  Individual RNs and social 
workers may decide to operate as a business to provide ALW services as a CCA provider.  
Verification of Provider Qualifications
Entity Responsible for Verification:
 
CDSS CCL  
Frequency of Verification:
 
Annual  
Appendix C: Participant Services
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 58 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 59]
C-1/C-3: Provider Specifications for Service
Service Type: Statutory Service
Service Name: Residential Habilitation
Provider Category:
Agency
Provider Type:
 
RCFE
 
Provider Qualifications
License (specify):
 
CDSS CCL issued RCFE license.  
Certificate (specify):
 
 
 
Other Standard (specify):
 
RCFEs must meet licensure and certification requirements set forth by the CCL.  Participating RCFEs 
must be in substantial compliance and good standing with licensing regulations (Ref: Title 22, § 
87101(s)(9)).  RCFEs that are on probation with and/or have pending accusation against the licensee are 
not in substantial compliance for the purpose of the ALW. (Ref. H&S § 1569.33).  The DHCS maintains 
an active list of RCFE applicants and providers that is provided to CCL for review and consideration of 
facility status.  CCL notifies the DHCS of any change in provider status for waiver providers.  
Verification of Provider Qualifications
Entity Responsible for Verification:
 
CDSS CCL  
Frequency of Verification:
 
Annual  
Appendix C: Participant Services
C-1/C-3: Service Specification
State laws, regulations and policies referenced in the specification are readily available to CMS upon request through 
the Medicaid agency or the operating agency (if applicable).
Service Type:
Other Service
As provided in 42 CFR §440.180(b)(9), the State requests the authority to provide the following additional service not 
specified in statute.
Service Title:
 
Augmented Plan of Care Development and Follow-up  
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 59 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 60]
HCBS Taxonomy:
Service Definition  (Scope):
 
Augmented Plan of Care Development and Follow-up is available to Tier’s 4 and 5 and requires prior approval from 
DHCS to add to a participant’s ISP. This service documents the need for additional, appropriate staff to have an 
increased level of contact with the participant and documentation of this need for increased level of contact must be 
maintained in the participant’s case file. The Care Coordination Agencies (CCA) will be required to perform a 
systematic assessment of a participant's behavior that includes a description of their functional and dysfunctional 
behaviors, the circumstances under which identified behaviors are exhibited and the factors that should be taken into 
account when developing a programmatic response to the behavior(s) in addition to Care Management services. 
This assessment is followed by a behavior plan that includes developing a written behavior plan including the 
prescription and management of psychiatric medications; training personnel to implement the behavior plan; 
monitoring the effectiveness of the behavior plan; and modifying the plan as necessary.  The written behavior plan 
shall identify those participants who need more structured approaches to address challenging behaviors (such as 
Residential Habilitation Services).  CCAs shall develop the behavior plan and monitor the effectiveness of the plan 
through periodic observation and assessment, and modify the plan as needed. 
 
The CCA shall work closely with the County Mental Health plans and services to coordinate mental health services 
and ongoing medication management.  The increased level of contact with the participant and coordination with 
County Mental Health is expected to require approximately twice the contact and assistance as persons who receive 
routine care coordination. 
 
The participant may choose to receive Augmented Plan of Care Development and Follow-up either via telehealth or 
in-person.  When provided via telehealth, the service must be provided in accordance with the telehealth assurances 
described under Main. Optional Additional Needed Information.  
Specify applicable (if any) limits on the amount, frequency, or duration of this service:
 
Service Assessment/Plan of Care Development ($320) may be billed in addition to "Care Coordination" for those 
participants that require the services as listed above.  This service will be reimbursed per month, based on prior 
authorization as outlined on the ISP.  
Service Delivery Method (check each that applies) :
 Participant-directed as specified in Appendix E
 Provider managed
Specify whether the service may be provided by (check each that applies) :
 Legally Responsible Person
 Relative
Category 1:
 
Sub-Category 1:
 
Category 2:
 
Sub-Category 2:
 
Category 3:
 
Sub-Category 3:
 
Category 4:
 
Sub-Category 4:
 
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 60 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 61]
Legal Guardian
Provider Specifications:
Provider Category Provider Type Title
Agency Care Coordination Agency (CCA)
Appendix C: Participant Services
C-1/C-3: Provider Specifications for Service
Service Type: Other Service
Service Name: Augmented Plan of Care Development and Follow-up
Provider Category:
Agency
Provider Type:
 
Care Coordination Agency (CCA)  
Provider Qualifications
License (specify):
 
Business License  
Certificate (specify):
 
 
 
Other Standard (specify):
 
Care Coordination Agency 
Minimum Requirements for Care Coordination Agency (CCA) 
Agency Experience and Staff Requirements 
 
A Care Coordination Agency must employ the following staff with the required years of experience 
providing care coordination, which includes the following activities:  conducting assessments, 
developing care plans, arranging for and monitoring service delivery, maintaining progress notes and 
case records, conducting quality assurance reviews, and collecting data. 
 
Registered Nurse (RN): 
A RN must have and maintain a current, unsuspended, un-revoked license to practice as an RN in 
California and have work experience that includes either a minimum of 10,000 hours in an acute care 
hospital or a minimum of 2,000 hours of experience in a home health setting. 
 
A Social Worker must have either a bachelor or master degree in social work, psychology, counseling, 
rehabilitation, gerontology, or sociology plus one year of related work experience. 
 
Agencies must have mandatory in-service training programs for their staff. 
Agencies must have a process for soliciting and/or obtaining feedback from clients regarding their 
satisfaction with service. 
Agencies must have a quality assurance program to track client complaints and incident reports. 
Agencies must maintain a service record for each client.  At a minimum, the record must contain all 
required forms, completed assessments, signed care plans (ISPs), and progress notes.  Agencies must 
agree to make these records available to DHCS for audit. 
Agencies must have contingency plans to deliver services in the event of a disaster or emergency. 
Staff must agree to collect data as specified.  
Verification of Provider Qualifications
Entity Responsible for Verification:
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 61 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 62]
DHCS upon application as an ALW provider and during annual review  
Frequency of Verification:
 
Annually  
Appendix C: Participant Services
C-1/C-3: Service Specification
State laws, regulations and policies referenced in the specification are readily available to CMS upon request through 
the Medicaid agency or the operating agency (if applicable).
Service Type:
Other Service
As provided in 42 CFR §440.180(b)(9), the State requests the authority to provide the following additional service not 
specified in statute.
Service Title:
 
NF Transition Care Coordination  
HCBS Taxonomy:
Service Definition  (Scope):
 
Category 1:
 
Sub-Category 1:
 
Category 2:
 
Sub-Category 2:
 
Category 3:
 
Sub-Category 3:
 
Category 4:
 
Sub-Category 4:
 
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 62 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 63]
This benefit is designed to address the increased need for Care Coordination prior to the successful transition of an 
individual from a nursing facility (NF) into an assisted living setting.  The Care Coordinator may claim the NF 
Transition Care Coordination reimbursement after the successful transition of the participant from a NF, NF 
subacute or acute facility into the ALW and establishment of residence in an assisted living setting. 
 
The services must be rendered in the timeframe not to exceed 180 consecutive days prior to transition, and the 
services rendered by the Care Coordination Agency (CCA) must be consistent with the definition of transition 
services. 
 
This one time reimbursement is intended to provide the sufficient hours for this transition to occur.  It is a one-time 
benefit per participant with a calculation of the service rate being the equivalent of 5 months of care coordination. 
 
The goal is for 60 percent of all waiver enrollees to transfer from a NF, NF subacute or acute facility in to the ALW. 
However, any individual who qualifies for the waiver may be admitted provided enrollment capacity is available. 
 
• The specific services rendered prior to NF transition are as followed: 
• Explanation of the ALW and alternative choices available to the participant 
• Determination of Medi-Cal eligibility 
• Administration of the Assessment Tool to determine tier at level of care 
• Provision of information regarding available facilities 
• Development of the ISP 
• Submission of all documents to the DHCS for approval 
• Upon confirmation of approval, coordination of transition of participant into chosen facility 
 
The participant may choose to receive NF Transition Care Coordination either via telehealth or in-person.  When 
provided via telehealth, the service must be provided in accordance with the telehealth assurances described under 
Main. Optional Additional Needed Information.  
Specify applicable (if any) limits on the amount, frequency, or duration of this service:
 
This ALW benefit may be incurred once in the lifetime of the participant.  
Service Delivery Method (check each that applies) :
 Participant-directed as specified in Appendix E
 Provider managed
Specify whether the service may be provided by (check each that applies) :
 Legally Responsible Person
 Relative
 Legal Guardian
Provider Specifications:
Provider Category Provider Type Title
Agency Care Coordination Agency
Appendix C: Participant Services
C-1/C-3: Provider Specifications for Service
Service Type: Other Service
Service Name: NF Transition Care Coordination
Provider Category:
Agency
Provider Type:
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 63 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 64]
Care Coordination Agency  
Provider Qualifications
License (specify):
 
Business License  
Certificate (specify):
 
 
 
Other Standard (specify):
 
Care Coordination Agency 
Minimum Requirements for Care Coordination Agency (CCA) 
Agency Experience and Staff Requirements 
 
A Care Coordination Agency must employ the following staff with the required years of experience 
providing care coordination, which includes the following activities:  conducting assessments, 
developing care plans, arranging for and monitoring service delivery, maintaining progress notes and 
case records, conducting quality assurance reviews, and collecting data. 
 
Registered Nurse (RN): 
A RN must have and maintain a current, unsuspended, un-revoked license to practice as an RN in 
California and have work experience that includes either a minimum of 10,000 hours in an acute care 
hospital or a minimum of 2,000 hours of experience in a home health setting. 
 
A Social Worker must have a either bachelor or master degree in social work, psychology, counseling, 
rehabilitation, gerontology, or sociology plus one year of related work experience. 
 
Agencies must have mandatory in-service training programs for their staff. 
Agencies must have a process for soliciting and/or obtaining feedback from clients regarding their 
satisfaction with service. 
Agencies must have a quality assurance program to track client complaints and incident reports. 
Agencies must maintain a service record for each client.  At a minimum, the record must contain all 
required forms, completed assessments, signed care plans (ISPs), and progress notes.  Agencies must 
agree to make these records available to DHCS for audit. 
Agencies must have contingency plans to deliver services in the event of a disaster or emergency. 
Staff must agree to collect data as specified.  
Verification of Provider Qualifications
Entity Responsible for Verification:
 
DHCS
 
Frequency of Verification:
 
Annually  
Appendix C: Participant Services
C-1: Summary of Services Covered (2 of 2)
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 64 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 65]
Provision of Case Management Services to Waiver Participants. Indicate how case management is furnished to waiver 
participants ( select one ):
 Not applicable  - Case management is not furnished as a distinct activity to waiver participants.
 Applicable  - Case management is furnished as a distinct activity to waiver participants.
Check each that applies:
 As a waiver service defined in Appendix C-3.  Do not complete item C-1-c.
 As a Medicaid state plan service under §1915(i) of the Act (HCBS as a State Plan Option).  Complete item 
C-1-c.
 As a Medicaid state plan service under §1915(g)(1) of the Act (Targeted Case Management).  Complete item 
C-1-c.
 As an administrative activity.  Complete item C-1-c.
 As a primary care case management system service under a concurrent managed care authority.  Complete 
item C-1-c.
b. 
Delivery of Case Management Services.  Specify the entity or entities that conduct case management functions on behalf 
of waiver participants:
 
Care Coordination Agency RN and Social Worker staff  
c. 
Appendix C: Participant Services
C-2: General Service Specifications (1 of 3)
Criminal History and/or Background Investigations.  Specify the state's policies concerning the conduct of criminal 
history and/or background investigations of individuals who provide waiver services (select one):
 No. Criminal history and/or background investigations are not required.
 Yes. Criminal history and/or background investigations are required.
Specify: (a) the types of positions (e.g., personal assistants, attendants) for which such investigations must be 
conducted; (b) the scope of such investigations (e.g., state, national); and, (c) the process for ensuring that mandatory 
investigations have been conducted. State laws, regulations and policies referenced in this description are available to 
CMS upon request through the Medicaid or the operating agency (if applicable):
 
Prior to issuing a license the Department of Social Services (DSS), Community Care Licensing (CCL) is responsible 
for conducting a criminal record review of the applicant, administrator or any other adult involved in the operations 
of a licensed facility including all individuals working, residing or volunteering in a that facility and has the 
authority to approve or deny a facility license, or employment, residence, or presence in an RCFE/ARF, based upon 
the results of such a review.   As part of the criminal records review DSS requires all individuals to submit 
fingerprints that are submitted to both the California Department of Justice and the FBI.  All staff must be cleared 
prior to initiating participant/patient contact.  Documentation of criminal record clearances and fingerprinting must 
be maintained by the facility and be available for inspection by DSS.  DSS may seek verification from a law 
enforcement agency or court if it is deemed necessary.  
a. 
Abuse Registry Screening.  Specify whether the state requires the screening of individuals who provide waiver services 
through a state-maintained abuse registry (select one):
 No. The state does not conduct abuse registry screening.
 Yes. The state maintains an abuse registry and requires the screening of individuals through this 
registry.
Specify: (a) the entity (entities) responsible for maintaining the abuse registry; (b) the types of positions for which 
b. 
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 65 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 66]
abuse registry screenings must be conducted; and, (c) the process for ensuring that mandatory screenings have been 
conducted. State laws, regulations and policies referenced in this description are available to CMS upon request 
through the Medicaid agency or the operating agency (if applicable):
 
 
 
Appendix C: Participant Services
C-2: General Service Specifications (2 of 3)
Note: Required information from this page (Appendix C-2-c) is contained in response to C-5.
Appendix C: Participant Services
C-2: General Service Specifications (3 of 3)
Provision of Personal Care or Similar Services by Legally Responsible Individuals.  A legally responsible individual is 
any person who has a duty under state law to care for another person and typically includes: (a) the parent (biological or 
adoptive) of a minor child or the guardian of a minor child who must provide care to the child or (b) a spouse of a waiver 
participant. Except at the option of the State and under extraordinary circumstances specified by the state, payment may 
not be made to a legally responsible individual for the provision of personal care or similar services that the legally 
responsible individual would ordinarily perform or be responsible to perform on behalf of a waiver participant. Select one :
 No. The state does not make payment to legally responsible individuals for furnishing personal care or similar 
services.
 Yes. The state makes payment to legally responsible individuals for furnishing personal care or similar services 
when they are qualified to provide the services.
Specify: (a) the legally responsible individuals who may be paid to furnish such services and the services they may 
provide; (b) state policies that specify the circumstances when payment may be authorized for the provision of 
extraordinary care  by a legally responsible individual and how the state ensures that the provision of services by a 
legally responsible individual is in the best interest of the participant; and, (c) the controls that are employed to ensure 
that payments are made only for services rendered.  Also, specify in Appendix C-1/C-3 the personal care or similar 
services for which payment may be made to legally responsible individuals under the state policies specified here.
 
 
 
d. 
 Self-directed
 Agency-operated
Other State Policies Concerning Payment for Waiver Services Furnished by Relatives/Legal Guardians.  Specify 
state policies concerning making payment to relatives/legal guardians for the provision of waiver services over and above 
the policies addressed in Item C-2-d. Select one :
 The state does not make payment to relatives/legal guardians for furnishing waiver services.
 The state makes payment to relatives/legal guardians under specific circumstances and only when the 
relative/guardian is qualified to furnish services.
Specify the specific circumstances under which payment is made, the types of relatives/legal guardians to whom 
payment may be made, and the services for which payment may be made. Specify the controls that are employed to 
ensure that payments are made only for services rendered.  Also, specify in Appendix C-1/C-3 each waiver service for 
which payment may be made to relatives/legal guardians.
e. 
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 66 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 67]
Relatives/legal guardians may be paid for providing waiver services whenever the relative/legal guardian is 
qualified to provide services as specified in Appendix C-1/C-3.
Specify the controls that are employed to ensure that payments are made only for services rendered.
 
 
 
 Other policy.
Specify:
 
 
 
Open Enrollment of Providers.  Specify the processes that are employed to assure that all willing and qualified providers 
have the opportunity to enroll as waiver service providers as provided in 42 CFR §431.51:
 
All RCFE/ARFs in the catchment area (county boundaries) are eligible to apply to be a waiver provider.  The 
RCFE/ARFs complete a two-page application and submit it to the DHCS.  The DHCS submits the facility information to 
the CCL to ascertain if the facility is regarded to be in substantial compliance and good standing in all licensing and 
certification requirements.  If CCL recommends the facility, the facility is notified in writing.  The letter advises the 
facility of the next steps to applying to be a Medi-Cal provider. 
 
All HHAs wishing to work in the catchment area are eligible to apply.  The HHA completes a two-page application and 
submits it to the DHCS.  The DHCS submits the HHA information to L&C for a recommendation on the status of the 
HHA.  The DHCS issues a  letter advising the HHA of the next steps for applying to be a Medi-Cal provider.  The DHCS 
works cooperatively with the local housing authorities in each county to identify and partner with an HHA to implement 
the PSH portion of the ALW. 
 
HHAs, Non-profit organization, individuals or other case management business may apply to ALW to become a Care 
Coordination Agency. 
 
Providers can access provider enrollment information through DHCS’ Provider Enrollment Division: 
https://www.dhcs.ca.gov/provgovpart/pages/ped.aspx  
f. 
Appendix C: Participant Services
Quality Improvement: Qualified Providers
As a distinct component of the States quality improvement strategy, provide information in the following fields to detail the States 
methods for discovery and remediation.
Methods for Discovery: Qualified Providers
The state demonstrates that it has designed and implemented an adequate system for assuring that all waiver services 
are provided by qualified providers.
Sub-Assurances:
Sub-Assurance: The State verifies that providers initially and continually meet required licensure and/or a. 
i. 
a. 
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 67 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 68]
certification standards and adhere to other standards prior to their furnishing waiver services.
Performance Measures
For each performance measure the State will use to assess compliance with the statutory assurance, 
complete the following. Where possible, include numerator/denominator.
For each performance measure, provide information on the aggregated data that will enable the State to 
analyze and assess progress toward the performance measure. In this section provide information on the 
method by which each source of data is analyzed statistically/deductively or inductively, how themes are 
identified or conclusions drawn, and how recommendations are formulated, where appropriate.
Performance Measure:
Qualified Providers  Number/ percent of enrolled HHA providers who did not allow 
their HHA provider qualifications to lapse.  Numerator: number of HHA providers 
who continuously met the specific provider qualifications of meeting the 
participantsADL and IADL needs.  Denominator: the number of HHA providers
Data Source  (Select one):
Record reviews, on-site
If 'Other' is selected, specify:
Responsible Party for 
data 
collection/generation
(check each that applies):
Frequency of data 
collection/generation
(check each that applies):
Sampling Approach
(check each that applies):
 State Medicaid 
Agency
 Weekly  100% Review
 Operating Agency  Monthly  Less than 100% 
Review
 Sub-State Entity  Quarterly  Representative 
Sample
Confidence 
Interval =
 
95%
 
 Other
Specify:
 
 
 
 Annually  Stratified
Describe Group:
 
 
 
 Continuously and 
Ongoing
 Other
Specify:
 
 
 
 Other
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 68 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 69]
Specify:
 
 
 
Data Aggregation and Analysis:
Responsible Party for data 
aggregation and analysis (check each 
that applies):
Frequency of data aggregation and 
analysis (check each that applies):
 State Medicaid Agency  Weekly
 Operating Agency  Monthly
 Sub-State Entity  Quarterly
 Other
Specify:
 
 
 
 Annually
 Continuously and Ongoing
 Other
Specify:
 
 
 
Performance Measure:
Number/percent of enrolled providers who are qualified to provide waiver services. 
Numerator: number/percent of providers enrolled in the waiver and are qualified to 
provide waiver services. Denominator: number of providers enrolled in the waiver.
Data Source  (Select one):
Record reviews, on-site
If 'Other' is selected, specify:
Responsible Party for 
data 
collection/generation
(check each that applies):
Frequency of data 
collection/generation
(check each that applies):
Sampling Approach
(check each that applies):
 State Medicaid 
Agency
 Weekly  100% Review
 Operating Agency  Monthly  Less than 100% 
Review
 Representative  Sub-State Entity  Quarterly
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 69 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 70]
Sample
Confidence 
Interval =
 
 
 
 Other
Specify:
 
CCL and L&C  
 Annually  Stratified
Describe Group:
 
 
 
 Continuously and 
Ongoing
 Other
Specify:
 
 
 
 Other
Specify:
 
 
 
Data Aggregation and Analysis:
Responsible Party for data 
aggregation and analysis (check each 
that applies):
Frequency of data aggregation and 
analysis (check each that applies):
 State Medicaid Agency  Weekly
 Operating Agency  Monthly
 Sub-State Entity  Quarterly
 Other
Specify:
 
CCL and L&C  
 Annually
 Continuously and Ongoing
 Other
Specify:
 
 
 
Performance Measure:
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 70 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 71]
Qualified Providers – Number/ percent of providers who did not allow their licensure 
and/or certification to lapse. Numerator: number of providers who continuously meet 
licensure and/or certification qualifications. . Denominator: the number providers 
reviewed.
Data Source  (Select one):
Record reviews, on-site
If 'Other' is selected, specify:
Responsible Party for 
data 
collection/generation
(check each that applies):
Frequency of data 
collection/generation
(check each that applies):
Sampling Approach
(check each that applies):
 State Medicaid 
Agency
 Weekly  100% Review
 Operating Agency  Monthly  Less than 100% 
Review
 Sub-State Entity  Quarterly  Representative 
Sample
Confidence 
Interval =
 
 
 
 Other
Specify:
 
CCL and L&C  
 Annually  Stratified
Describe Group:
 
 
 
 Continuously and 
Ongoing
 Other
Specify:
 
 
 
 Other
Specify:
 
 
 
Data Aggregation and Analysis:
Responsible Party for data 
aggregation and analysis (check each 
that applies):
Frequency of data aggregation and 
analysis (check each that applies):
 State Medicaid Agency  Weekly
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 71 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 72]
Responsible Party for data 
aggregation and analysis (check each 
that applies):
Frequency of data aggregation and 
analysis (check each that applies):
 Operating Agency  Monthly
 Sub-State Entity  Quarterly
 Other
Specify:
 
CCL and L&C  
 Annually
 Continuously and Ongoing
 Other
Specify:
 
 
 
Sub-Assurance: The State monitors non-licensed/non-certified providers to assure adherence to waiver 
requirements.
For each performance measure the State will use to assess compliance with the statutory assurance, 
complete the following. Where possible, include numerator/denominator.
For each performance measure, provide information on the aggregated data that will enable the State to 
analyze and assess progress toward the performance measure. In this section provide information on the 
method by which each source of data is analyzed statistically/deductively or inductively, how themes are 
identified or conclusions drawn, and how recommendations are formulated, where appropriate.
b. 
Sub-Assurance: The State implements its policies and procedures for verifying that provider training is 
conducted in accordance with state requirements and the approved waiver.
For each performance measure the State will use to assess compliance with the statutory assurance, 
complete the following. Where possible, include numerator/denominator.
For each performance measure, provide information on the aggregated data that will enable the State to 
analyze and assess progress toward the performance measure. In this section provide information on the 
method by which each source of data is analyzed statistically/deductively or inductively, how themes are 
identified or conclusions drawn, and how recommendations are formulated, where appropriate.
Performance Measure:
Provider Training - Number/percent of enrolled program providers who had 
mandatory in-service training programs for their staff. Numerator: Number of 
providers who held mandatory in-service training programs for their staff. 
Denominator: Number of providers reviewed.
Data Source  (Select one):
Training verification records
If 'Other' is selected, specify:
c. 
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 72 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 73]
Responsible Party for 
data 
collection/generation
(check each that applies):
Frequency of data 
collection/generation
(check each that applies):
Sampling Approach
(check each that applies):
 State Medicaid 
Agency
 Weekly  100% Review
 Operating Agency  Monthly  Less than 100% 
Review
 Sub-State Entity  Quarterly  Representative 
Sample
Confidence 
Interval =
 
 
 
 Other
Specify:
 
 
 
 Annually  Stratified
Describe Group:
 
 
 
 Continuously and 
Ongoing
 Other
Specify:
 
 
 
 Other
Specify:
 
 
 
Data Aggregation and Analysis:
Responsible Party for data 
aggregation and analysis (check each 
that applies):
Frequency of data aggregation and 
analysis (check each that applies):
 State Medicaid Agency  Weekly
 Operating Agency  Monthly
 Sub-State Entity  Quarterly
 Other
Specify:
 
 Annually
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 73 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 74]
Responsible Party for data 
aggregation and analysis (check each 
that applies):
Frequency of data aggregation and 
analysis (check each that applies):
 
 
 Continuously and Ongoing
 Other
Specify:
 
 
 
If applicable, in the textbox below provide any necessary additional information on the strategies employed by the 
State to discover/identify problems/issues within the waiver program, including frequency and parties responsible.
 
DHCS employs the following strategies to identify problems within the waiver program: conduct annual reviews 
to inspect participant and provider files, interview participants and providers, inspect physical plants and review 
waiver expenditures in accordance with the state’s responsibility to provide oversight over its contracted entities 
separate from the reviews conducted by the Coordinated Care Agency and Community Care Licensing. DHCS 
provides continuous and ongoing TA to all waiver providers.  This assistance includes clinical input, provider 
requirements, assistance with billing and significant issue documentation.  The DHCS provides extensive training 
for new waiver providers including a manual specific to provider type.  The DHCS conducts a biennial QA audit 
and review.  The data from the review are aggregated and presented back to the providers in the format of TA. 
New strategies for improving waiver implementation are fostered by this process.  
ii. 
Methods for Remediation/Fixing Individual Problems
Describe the States method for addressing individual problems as they are discovered. Include information 
regarding responsible parties and GENERAL methods for problem correction. In addition, provide information on 
the methods used by the state to document these items.
 
The DHCS identifies individual problems that are specific or unique to a single provider and addresses the 
problems directly with the provider.  The nature of the issue and the severity of the problem are identified and 
discussed with the provider by the DHCS. 
 
A Corrective Action Plan (CAP) or remediation process is developed by DHCS in conjunction with the provider 
to respond to the issue.  The DHCS then monitors the provider with supportive TA to assure that resolution 
occurs. 
 
If the issue continues, further TA with a more stringent CAP is developed.  Providers may be placed in suspension 
from admitting and retaining additional waiver participants until the issue is resolved.  The initial CAP period is 
between 90 days to 180 days depending on the nature and severity of the problem/finding. DHCS has sole 
discretion to determine the number of CAPs issued and duration period for each CAP hereunder, and this option is 
conditioned on the finding that DHCS determination is conclusive and binding. 
 
In the event that the issue continues, or grows in proportion, the provider is disenrolled as a waiver provider and 
participants are moved to another provider site for continuity of care. 
 
The participants are provided with a list of participating facilities within the county from which to choose.  The 
CCA responsible for the participants would be the lead agency for assuring that the participant's freedom of 
choice is respected.  
i. 
Remediation Data Aggregationii. 
b. 
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 74 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 75]
Remediation-related Data Aggregation and Analysis (including trend identification)
Responsible Party (check each that applies): Frequency of data aggregation and analysis
(check each that applies):
 State Medicaid Agency  Weekly
 Operating Agency  Monthly
 Sub-State Entity  Quarterly
 Other
Specify:
 
CCL and L&C  
 Annually
 Continuously and Ongoing
 Other
Specify:
 
 
 
Timelines
When the State does not have all elements of the Quality Improvement Strategy in place, provide timelines to design 
methods for discovery and remediation related to the assurance of Qualified Providers that are currently non-operational.
 No
 Yes
Please provide a detailed strategy for assuring Qualified Providers, the specific timeline for implementing identified 
strategies, and the parties responsible for its operation.
 
 
 
c. 
Appendix C: Participant Services
C-3: Waiver Services Specifications
Section C-3 'Service Specifications' is incorporated into Section C-1 'Waiver Services.'
Appendix C: Participant Services
C-4: Additional Limits on Amount of Waiver Services
Additional Limits on Amount of Waiver Services.  Indicate whether the waiver employs any of the following additional 
limits on the amount of waiver services ( select one ).
 Not applicable - The state does not impose a limit on the amount of waiver services except as provided in Appendix 
C-3.
 Applicable  - The state imposes additional limits on the amount of waiver services.
When a limit is employed, specify: (a) the waiver services to which the limit applies; (b) the basis of the limit, 
including its basis in historical expenditure/utilization patterns and, as applicable, the processes and methodologies 
that are used to determine the amount of the limit to which a participant's services are subject; (c) how the limit will 
be adjusted over the course of the waiver period; (d) provisions for adjusting or making exceptions to the limit based 
on participant health and welfare needs or other factors specified by the state; (e) the safeguards that are in effect 
when the amount of the limit is insufficient to meet a participant's needs; (f) how participants are notified of the 
a. 
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 75 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 76]
amount of the limit. ( check each that applies )
 Limit(s) on Set(s) of Services.  There is a limit on the maximum dollar amount of waiver services that is 
authorized for one or more sets of services offered under the waiver.
Furnish the information specified above.
 
 
 
 Prospective Individual Budget Amount.  There is a limit on the maximum dollar amount of waiver services 
authorized for each specific participant.
Furnish the information specified above.
 
 
 
 Budget Limits by Level of Support.  Based on an assessment process and/or other factors, participants are 
assigned to funding levels that are limits on the maximum dollar amount of waiver services.
Furnish the information specified above.
 
 
 
 Other Type of Limit.  The state employs another type of limit.
Describe the limit and furnish the information specified above.
 
 
 
Appendix C: Participant Services
C-5: Home and Community-Based Settings
Explain how residential and non-residential settings in this waiver comply with federal HCB Settings requirements at 42 CFR 
441.301(c)(4)-(5) and associated CMS guidance. Include:
Description of the settings and how they meet federal HCB Settings requirements, at the time of submission and in the 
future.
1. 
Description of the means by which the state Medicaid agency ascertains that all waiver settings meet federal HCB Setting 
requirements, at the time of this submission and ongoing.
2. 
Note instructions at Module 1, Attachment #2, HCB Settings Waiver Transition Plan  for description of settings that do not meet 
requirements at the time of submission. Do not duplicate that information here.
 
For information regarding the Waiver specific transition plan, please refer to Attachment #2 in this application.  
Appendix D: Participant-Centered Planning and Service Delivery
D-1: Service Plan Development (1 of 8)
State Participant-Centered Service Plan Title:  
Individual Service Plan (ISP)  
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 76 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 77]
Responsibility for Service Plan Development.  Per 42 CFR §441.301(b)(2), specify who is responsible for the 
development of the service plan and the qualifications of these individuals (select each that applies):
 Registered nurse, licensed to practice in the state
 Licensed practical or vocational nurse, acting within the scope of practice under state law
 Licensed physician (M.D. or D.O)
 Case Manager  (qualifications specified in Appendix C-1/C-3)
 Case Manager  (qualifications not specified in Appendix C-1/C-3).
Specify qualifications:
 
 
 
 Social Worker
Specify qualifications:
 
A. 	 Have either a bachelor or master degree in social work, psychology, counseling, rehabilitation, gerontology, 
sociology or a related field of study. 
B. 	 Have one year of related work experience.  
 Other
Specify the individuals and their qualifications:
 
 
 
a. 
Appendix D: Participant-Centered Planning and Service Delivery
D-1: Service Plan Development (2 of 8)
Service Plan Development Safeguards.  Select one:
 Entities and/or individuals that have responsibility for service plan development may not provide other 
direct waiver services to the participant.
 Entities and/or individuals that have responsibility for service plan development may provide other 
direct waiver services to the participant.
The state has established the following safeguards to ensure that service plan development is conducted in the best 
interests of the participant.  Specify:
 
 
 
b. 
Appendix D: Participant-Centered Planning and Service Delivery
D-1: Service Plan Development (3 of 8)
Supporting the Participant in Service Plan Development.  Specify: (a) the supports and information that are made 
available to the participant (and/or family or legal representative, as appropriate) to direct and be actively engaged in the 
service plan development process and (b) the participant's authority to determine who is included in the process.
 
c. 
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 77 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 78]
The Care Coordination Agency (CCA) provides support on such things that would assist the participant with being 
successful in the program. Such supports include, but are not limited to, educating members and their representatives 
about ALW program criteria, obtaining available resources in the community, providing direction of the coordinated care, 
determining frequency of needed services, etc.  In addition, the CCA is required to engage participants in the service plan 
development process to ensure all needs are addressed, including waiver services and personal/community needs. The 
Individualized Service Plan (ISP) is a participant-directed plan that identifies the services needed by the participant to 
assure health and safety in the assisted living or the assisted care settings.  A participant has the authority to include 
individuals of his/her choice to participate in the service plan development process.  The participant has the freedom of 
choice to select providers, including the CCA. During development of the ISP, individuals of the participant’s choice, 
representatives from the residential care facility or the home health agency, and the care coordination agency can offer 
support and guidance to the participant.  Each of these individuals and/or entities can offer a unique perspective to ensure 
the participant’s plan for long-term services and supports is personalized to his or her specific needs. 
 
The participant signs the ISP and indicates he/she was active in the development of the ISP and agrees or disagrees with 
any portion of the ISP as developed.  The goals of the ISP are based on the 6-month interval until the subsequent 
reassessment. 
 
The ISP also identifies any known issue, intervention and outcome of identified issues.  The issues are defined in 
nursing/health care language and are not medical diagnoses. 
 
The intent of identifying issues for the participant is to lead to a timely resolution of those issues by setting goals for 
remediation.  An accurate goal is measureable and definitive, not vague as to time and manner of resolution.  The 
intervention is the specific action that will be taken to achieve the goal.  The outcome is the result of the intervention.  If 
the outcome is not the resolution of the issue, then the issue continues to be an active issue on the ISP.  When issues are 
resolved, the resolution is documented as the outcome, and the issue is subsequently inactive on the ISP.  The ISP reflects 
the current needs of the participant and includes short-term goals that are resolved in the first six months, as well as long-
term goals that persist on the ISP until eventual resolution. 
 
The advocates for the participants involved in the ALW have stated a strong preference for the ISP to reflect the 
individualized needs of the participant.  CCAs are to refrain from the use of repetitive language common to all ISPs but 
rather ensure that the ISP accurately reflects the current needs of each participant.  
Appendix D: Participant-Centered Planning and Service Delivery
D-1: Service Plan Development (4 of 8)
Service Plan Development Process.  In four pages or less, describe the process that is used to develop the participant-
centered service plan, including: (a) who develops the plan, who participates in the process, and the timing of the plan; (b) 
the types of assessments that are conducted to support the service plan development process, including securing 
information about participant needs, preferences and goals, and health status; (c) how the participant is informed of the 
services that are available under the waiver; (d) how the plan development process ensures that the service plan addresses 
participant goals, needs (including health care needs), and preferences; (e) how waiver and other services are coordinated; 
(f) how the plan development process provides for the assignment of responsibilities to implement and monitor the plan; 
and, (g) how and when the plan is updated, including when the participant's needs change. State laws, regulations, and 
policies cited that affect the service plan development process are available to CMS upon request through the Medicaid 
agency or the operating agency (if applicable):
 
d. 
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 78 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 79]
The ISP is based on the needs identified by the ALW Assessment Tool, clinical records, professional assessments and the 
personal preferences of the participant.  The CCA administers the Assessment Tool which determines participant 
eligibility for the waiver.  The tool measures the need for assistance with ADLs and the need for assistance in one or 
more of the seven functional categories: Cognitive Patterns, Behavioral Symptoms, Continence, Communications, 
Medications, Skin Conditions, or Other Treatments.  Based on the combined need for assistance in these areas, the tool 
calculates a level of care eligibility and tier of service for the participant. 
 
The ISP is a plan describing the services rendered to the participant, the manner in which the services are delivered, and 
the desired outcome for each service.  The ISP must include specification of the type of provider performing each service 
and the frequency and duration of each service.  Participants may choose to be involved in all aspects of the design, 
delivery, and modification of their services.  They have the right to decide when services are delivered, where services 
are delivered and how services are delivered. 
 
The CCA will ensure that the ISP is completed during the initial meeting and reviewed (and updated as needed) every six 
months.  On an ongoing basis, the CCAs, in collaboration with the participants, will also be responsible for ensuring the 
appropriate, timely delivery of needed services.  This will be achieved through face-to-face meetings with the participant 
and/or responsible parties every month, and a review of participant records at each six-month reassessment.  Participants 
may request a review of their ISP at any time.  The CCA assessments and determinations of Medi-Cal eligibility are 
subject to verification by the DHCS.  Every six months the CCA RN or social worker will reassess participants and 
determine with the participant what, if any, updates need to be made to the ISP.  The CCA will assess the participant for 
health and safety issues.  Any signs of abuse or neglect will be reported immediately to Adult Protective Services (APS), 
the DHCS, and, if the participant is residing in an RCFE/ARF, CCL.  If the participant is residing in PSH, L&C shall be 
notified.  
Appendix D: Participant-Centered Planning and Service Delivery
D-1: Service Plan Development (5 of 8)
Risk Assessment and Mitigation.  Specify how potential risks to the participant are assessed during the service plan 
development process and how strategies to mitigate risk are incorporated into the service plan, subject to participant needs 
and preferences. In addition, describe how the service plan development process addresses backup plans and the 
arrangements that are used for backup.
 
e. 
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 79 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 80]
The ISP identifies potential risks to the participants that could compromise the participant's health and safety or well-
being in the assisted living or assisted care setting.  These risks may be identified by the CCA, the participant, the 
participant's representative, or by the direct provider of the assisted living or assisted care services.  The CCA, in 
conjunction with the participant, representatives and providers, details a plan to mitigate or minimize the risks as 
described.  The participant has the right and obligation to express his/her concerns with both the identification of risk 
factors and the proposed strategies to address those risks. 
 
The ISP shall also include a long-term plan for accessing emergency services in the event of catastrophic or wide spread 
emergency occurrences.  The ISP plan shall reflect the mobility limitations specific to each participant. 
 
The CCA is initially responsible for assisting the member when there are issues with service delivery. The state works 
with the CCA, facility staff, the member and member’s family where applicable to bridge any gaps in the event of service 
delivery disruption that cannot be immediately addressed by the CCA. Participating ALW providers are required through 
regulation to have a back-up plan to ensure service delivery in the event of an emergency. These plans are checked during 
monitoring visits by DHCS to ensure compliance. 
 
 
RCFE/ARFs and Home Health Agencies must have current, written emergency disaster plans which must include the 
following: contain a plan for evacuation, address elements of sheltering in place, identify temporary relocation sites, and 
identify detailed staff assignments in the event of a disaster or an emergency.  The emergency disaster plan must be 
posted prominently in the facility and be available to emergency responders. 
 
California Government Code sections 8550-8551 provide the authority for the State to develop the framework and 
processes to establish statewide emergency programs.  In licensed residential care settings, the California Department of 
Social Services regulates processes for accessing emergency services; in public subsidized housing settings, processes for 
provision of emergency services conform to the federal Housing and Urban Development requirements.  
Appendix D: Participant-Centered Planning and Service Delivery
D-1: Service Plan Development (6 of 8)
Informed Choice of Providers.  Describe how participants are assisted in obtaining information about and selecting from 
among qualified providers of the waiver services in the service plan.
 
Participants have the choice of waiver providers before they are enrolled in the ALW.  Individuals and/or family 
members interested in learning about the choice of waiver providers are directed to the Department of Health Care 
Services’ website which lists “Long-Term Care Alternatives” for home and community-based service options where 
ALW providers are identified by location and service area. 
 
The initial contact with potential participants includes a discussion of the CCAs available in the county of choice.  The 
CCA presents the individual with a list and description of the RCFE/ARFs/PSHs in the county of choice with a 
discussion of the similarities and distinctions among them. 
 
As an example, some participants prefer the larger RCFE/ARFs with more apartment-like units and a greater variety of 
residents, while some participants prefer the smaller, six-bed style RCFE/ARFs with a more homelike atmosphere.  The 
CCAs are responsible for providing the participants with the information they require to make informed choices.  
f. 
Appendix D: Participant-Centered Planning and Service Delivery
D-1: Service Plan Development (7 of 8)
Process for Making Service Plan Subject to the Approval of the Medicaid Agency.  Describe the process by which the 
service plan is made subject to the approval of the Medicaid agency in accordance with 42 CFR §441.301(b)(1)(i):
 
Every ISP is submitted to the DHCS every six months accompanied by the assessment for review and approval.  The 
CCA retains the original and provides the DHCS (as well as the direct service provider) a copy of the ISP.  
g. 
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 80 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 81]
Appendix D: Participant-Centered Planning and Service Delivery
D-1: Service Plan Development (8 of 8)
Service Plan Review and Update.  The service plan is subject to at least annual periodic review and update to assess the 
appropriateness and adequacy of the services as participant needs change. Specify the minimum schedule for the review 
and update of the service plan:
 Every three months or more frequently when necessary
 Every six months or more frequently when necessary
 Every twelve months or more frequently when necessary
 Other schedule
Specify the other schedule:
 
 
 
h. 
Maintenance of Service Plan Forms.  Written copies or electronic facsimiles of service plans are maintained for a 
minimum period of 3 years as required by 45 CFR §92.42. Service plans are maintained by the following (check each that 
applies):
 Medicaid agency
 Operating agency
 Case manager
 Other
Specify:
 
The Medicaid Agency maintains a copy. 
 
The CCA as the Case Manager, maintains the original.  
i. 
Appendix D: Participant-Centered Planning and Service Delivery
D-2: Service Plan Implementation and Monitoring
Service Plan Implementation and Monitoring.  Specify: (a) the entity (entities) responsible for monitoring the 
implementation of the service plan and participant health and welfare; (b) the monitoring and follow-up method(s) that are 
used; and, (c) the frequency with which monitoring is performed.
 
a. 
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 81 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 82]
The CCA is responsible for the development of the ISP with approval from the DHCS.  The ISP is implemented by the 
direct service provider as well as any additional supportive entities as identified.  As an example, the participant may 
have a need to attend church services.  The provider may be a volunteer from the church to provide a ride to and from 
services. 
 
The CCA is responsible for the primary monitoring of the ISP implementation.  During monthly visits and reassessments, 
the CCA ensures all waiver services and participants needs identified in the ISP are being furnished.  This is 
accomplished through meeting with participants to identify if they are experiencing any issues with accessing services. In 
addition, monthly visits ensure the CCA develops a rapport with the RCFE/ARF/HHA providers, allowing for the regular 
exchange of information, identification of new risks and confirmation that all services identified in the ISP are being 
rendered. CCAs collect information during both their monthly visits and 6-month reassessments.  CCAs keep individual 
case files that are part of the DHCS annual provider audit. Reassessments are submitted to DHCS every 6 months. 
Problems identified during the monthly CCA visit are reported immediately to DHCS.  DHCS and CCAs work together 
to monitor serious incident activity and resolution. To ensure compliance the CCA can adjust the ISP (if necessary). 
 
 
The DHCS provides additional monitoring and oversight through regular contact with all providers as well as biennial 
QA reviews.  The biennial reviews require that DHCS staff visit the CCA offices as well as the RCFE/ARF and the PSH 
sites.  The biennial QA audits include the Participant Experience Survey (PES) to ensure that the participants are satisfied 
with their overall delivery of waiver services.  
Monitoring Safeguards.  Select one:
 Entities and/or individuals that have responsibility to monitor service plan implementation and 
participant health and welfare may not provide other direct waiver services to the participant.
 Entities and/or individuals that have responsibility to monitor service plan implementation and 
participant health and welfare may provide other direct waiver services to the participant.
The state has established the following safeguards to ensure that monitoring is conducted in the best interests of the 
participant.  Specify:
 
 
 
b. 
Appendix D: Participant-Centered Planning and Service Delivery
Quality Improvement: Service Plan
As a distinct component of the States quality improvement strategy, provide information in the following fields to detail the States 
methods for discovery and remediation.
Methods for Discovery: Service Plan Assurance/Sub-assurances
The state demonstrates it has designed and implemented an effective system for reviewing the adequacy of service plans 
for waiver participants.
Sub-Assurances:
Sub-assurance: Service plans address all participants assessed needs (including health and safety risk 
factors) and personal goals, either by the provision of waiver services or through other means.
Performance Measures
For each performance measure the State will use to assess compliance with the statutory assurance (or 
sub-assurance), complete the following. Where possible, include numerator/denominator.
For each performance measure, provide information on the aggregated data that will enable the State to 
analyze and assess progress toward the performance measure. In this section provide information on the 
a. 
i. 
a. 
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 82 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 83]
method by which each source of data is analyzed statistically/deductively or inductively, how themes are 
identified or conclusions drawn, and how recommendations are formulated, where appropriate.
Performance Measure:
Individual Service Plan (ISP): Number/percentage of participants with an ISP that 
reflect the participants needs as identified by the assessment, clinical records, 
professional assessments and the personal preferences of the participant. Numerator: 
Number/percent of case files that reflect the participants' needs as identified. 
Denominator: Number of case files reviewed.
Data Source  (Select one):
Record reviews, on-site
If 'Other' is selected, specify:
Responsible Party for 
data 
collection/generation
(check each that applies):
Frequency of data 
collection/generation
(check each that applies):
Sampling Approach
(check each that applies):
 State Medicaid 
Agency
 Weekly  100% Review
 Operating Agency  Monthly  Less than 100% 
Review
 Sub-State Entity  Quarterly  Representative 
Sample
Confidence 
Interval =
 
95%
 
 Other
Specify:
 
 
 
 Annually  Stratified
Describe Group:
 
 
 
 Continuously and 
Ongoing
 Other
Specify:
 
 
 
 Other
Specify:
 
 
 
Data Aggregation and Analysis:
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 83 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 84]
Responsible Party for data 
aggregation and analysis (check each 
that applies):
Frequency of data aggregation and 
analysis (check each that applies):
 State Medicaid Agency  Weekly
 Operating Agency  Monthly
 Sub-State Entity  Quarterly
 Other
Specify:
 
 
 
 Annually
 Continuously and Ongoing
 Other
Specify:
 
 
 
Sub-assurance: The State monitors service plan development in accordance with its policies and 
procedures.
Performance Measures
For each performance measure the State will use to assess compliance with the statutory assurance (or 
sub-assurance), complete the following. Where possible, include numerator/denominator.
For each performance measure, provide information on the aggregated data that will enable the State to 
analyze and assess progress toward the performance measure. In this section provide information on the 
method by which each source of data is analyzed statistically/deductively or inductively, how themes are 
identified or conclusions drawn, and how recommendations are formulated, where appropriate.
Performance Measure:
Number and percent of waiver participants whose service plans were updated/revised 
to address a participants’ changing need. Numerator: Number of case files that 
reflect updates to the participants' needs as identified. Denominator: Number of case 
files reflecting reassessments.
Data Source  (Select one):
Record reviews, on-site
If 'Other' is selected, specify:
Responsible Party for 
data 
collection/generation
(check each that applies):
Frequency of data 
collection/generation
(check each that applies):
Sampling Approach
(check each that applies):
 State Medicaid  Weekly  100% Review
b. 
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 84 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 85]
Agency
 Operating Agency  Monthly  Less than 100% 
Review
 Sub-State Entity  Quarterly  Representative 
Sample
Confidence 
Interval =
 
 
 
 Other
Specify:
 
 
 
 Annually  Stratified
Describe Group:
 
 
 
 Continuously and 
Ongoing
 Other
Specify:
 
 
 
 Other
Specify:
 
 
 
Data Aggregation and Analysis:
Responsible Party for data 
aggregation and analysis (check each 
that applies):
Frequency of data aggregation and 
analysis (check each that applies):
 State Medicaid Agency  Weekly
 Operating Agency  Monthly
 Sub-State Entity  Quarterly
 Other
Specify:
 
 
 
 Annually
 Continuously and Ongoing
 Other
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 85 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 86]
Responsible Party for data 
aggregation and analysis (check each 
that applies):
Frequency of data aggregation and 
analysis (check each that applies):
Specify:
 
 
 
Sub-assurance: Service plans are updated/revised at least annually or when warranted by changes in the 
waiver participants needs.
Performance Measures
For each performance measure the State will use to assess compliance with the statutory assurance (or 
sub-assurance), complete the following. Where possible, include numerator/denominator.
For each performance measure, provide information on the aggregated data that will enable the State to 
analyze and assess progress toward the performance measure. In this section provide information on the 
method by which each source of data is analyzed statistically/deductively or inductively, how themes are 
identified or conclusions drawn, and how recommendations are formulated, where appropriate.
Performance Measure:
Timely Submission of the Individual Service Plan (ISP) – Number/percent of 
participant files reflecting ISPs submitted within 10 days after the completion of the 
assessment. Numerator: Number of participants case files with ISP submitted timely. 
Denominator: Number of case files reviewed.
Data Source  (Select one):
Record reviews, on-site
If 'Other' is selected, specify:
Responsible Party for 
data 
collection/generation
(check each that applies):
Frequency of data 
collection/generation
(check each that applies):
Sampling Approach
(check each that applies):
 State Medicaid 
Agency
 Weekly  100% Review
 Operating Agency  Monthly  Less than 100% 
Review
 Sub-State Entity  Quarterly  Representative 
Sample
Confidence 
Interval =
 
95% 
confidence 
interval +/- 5%  
 Other
Specify:
 Stratified
Describe Group:
 Annually
c. 
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 86 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 87]
CCA
 
 
 
 
 Continuously and 
Ongoing
 Other
Specify:
 
 
 
 Other
Specify:
 
 
 
Data Aggregation and Analysis:
Responsible Party for data 
aggregation and analysis (check each 
that applies):
Frequency of data aggregation and 
analysis (check each that applies):
 State Medicaid Agency  Weekly
 Operating Agency  Monthly
 Sub-State Entity  Quarterly
 Other
Specify:
 
 
 
 Annually
 Continuously and Ongoing
 Other
Specify:
 
 
 
Performance Measure:
Number and percent of waiver participants whose service plans were updated/revised 
to address a participants’ changing need- Numerator: Number of case files that 
reflect updates to the participants' needs as identified. Denominator: Number of case 
files reflecting reassessments.
Data Source  (Select one):
Record reviews, on-site
If 'Other' is selected, specify:
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 87 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 88]
Responsible Party for 
data 
collection/generation
(check each that applies):
Frequency of data 
collection/generation
(check each that applies):
Sampling Approach
(check each that applies):
 State Medicaid 
Agency
 Weekly  100% Review
 Operating Agency  Monthly  Less than 100% 
Review
 Sub-State Entity  Quarterly  Representative 
Sample
Confidence 
Interval =
 
 
 
 Other
Specify:
 
 
 
 Annually  Stratified
Describe Group:
 
 
 
 Continuously and 
Ongoing
 Other
Specify:
 
 
 
 Other
Specify:
 
 
 
Data Aggregation and Analysis:
Responsible Party for data 
aggregation and analysis (check each 
that applies):
Frequency of data aggregation and 
analysis (check each that applies):
 State Medicaid Agency  Weekly
 Operating Agency  Monthly
 Sub-State Entity  Quarterly
 Other
Specify:
 
 Annually
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 88 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 89]
Responsible Party for data 
aggregation and analysis (check each 
that applies):
Frequency of data aggregation and 
analysis (check each that applies):
 
 
 Continuously and Ongoing
 Other
Specify:
 
 
 
Sub-assurance: Services are delivered in accordance with the service plan, including the type, scope, 
amount, duration and frequency specified in the service plan.
Performance Measures
For each performance measure the State will use to assess compliance with the statutory assurance (or 
sub-assurance), complete the following. Where possible, include numerator/denominator.
For each performance measure, provide information on the aggregated data that will enable the State to 
analyze and assess progress toward the performance measure. In this section provide information on the 
method by which each source of data is analyzed statistically/deductively or inductively, how themes are 
identified or conclusions drawn, and how recommendations are formulated, where appropriate.
Performance Measure:
Services Delivered according to type, scope, amount, duration and frequency 
identified in ISP - Number/percent of participants with services delivered in 
accordance to ISP Numerator: Number of facility case files with documentation that 
services were delivered according to type, scope, amount, duration and frequency 
identified in ISP. Denominator: Number of facility case files reviewed.
Data Source  (Select one):
Record reviews, on-site
If 'Other' is selected, specify:
Responsible Party for 
data 
collection/generation
(check each that applies):
Frequency of data 
collection/generation
(check each that applies):
Sampling Approach
(check each that applies):
 State Medicaid 
Agency
 Weekly  100% Review
 Operating Agency  Monthly  Less than 100% 
Review
 Representative 
Sample
Confidence 
 Sub-State Entity  Quarterly
d. 
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 89 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 90]
Interval =
 
95% 
confidence +/- 
5%  
 Other
Specify:
 
CCA
 
 Annually  Stratified
Describe Group:
 
 
 
 Continuously and 
Ongoing
 Other
Specify:
 
 
 
 Other
Specify:
 
 
 
Data Aggregation and Analysis:
Responsible Party for data 
aggregation and analysis (check each 
that applies):
Frequency of data aggregation and 
analysis (check each that applies):
 State Medicaid Agency  Weekly
 Operating Agency  Monthly
 Sub-State Entity  Quarterly
 Other
Specify:
 
 
 
 Annually
 Continuously and Ongoing
 Other
Specify:
 
 
 
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 90 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 91]
Sub-assurance: Participants are afforded choice: Between/among waiver services and providers.
Performance Measures
For each performance measure the State will use to assess compliance with the statutory assurance (or 
sub-assurance), complete the following. Where possible, include numerator/denominator.
For each performance measure, provide information on the aggregated data that will enable the State to 
analyze and assess progress toward the performance measure. In this section provide information on the 
method by which each source of data is analyzed statistically/deductively or inductively, how themes are 
identified or conclusions drawn, and how recommendations are formulated, where appropriate.
Performance Measure:
Participants are offered a choice between waiver services and institutional care 
–Number/ percent of participants with a documented choice between waiver services 
and institutional care. Numerator: number of participants whose Freedom of Choice 
document is signed, dated and in the CCA chart. Denominator: a representative 
number of participants
Data Source  (Select one):
Record reviews, on-site
If 'Other' is selected, specify:
Responsible Party for 
data 
collection/generation
(check each that applies):
Frequency of data 
collection/generation
(check each that applies):
Sampling Approach
(check each that applies):
 State Medicaid 
Agency
 Weekly  100% Review
 Operating Agency  Monthly  Less than 100% 
Review
 Sub-State Entity  Quarterly  Representative 
Sample
Confidence 
Interval =
 
 
 
 Other
Specify:
 
 
 
 Annually  Stratified
Describe Group:
 
 
 
 Continuously and 
Ongoing
 Other
Specify:
 
 
 
e. 
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 91 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 92]
Other
Specify:
 
 
 
Data Aggregation and Analysis:
Responsible Party for data 
aggregation and analysis (check each 
that applies):
Frequency of data aggregation and 
analysis (check each that applies):
 State Medicaid Agency  Weekly
 Operating Agency  Monthly
 Sub-State Entity  Quarterly
 Other
Specify:
 
 
 
 Annually
 Continuously and Ongoing
 Other
Specify:
 
 
 
If applicable, in the textbox below provide any necessary additional information on the strategies employed by the 
State to discover/identify problems/issues within the waiver program, including frequency and parties responsible.
 
The DHCS will compile a biennial QA Audit and Report summarizing the data and the findings regarding the 
LOC determinations.  These findings are presented to the CCAs (also to the RCFE/ARF and HHA providers) by 
the DHCS.  The DHCS is responsible for the identification and prioritization of issues as presented.  The CCAs 
are responsible for remediation of those issues, and the efficacy of this process by the documentation of all 
findings and their remediation in the subsequent assessment submission period.  
ii. 
Methods for Remediation/Fixing Individual Problems
Describe the States method for addressing individual problems as they are discovered. Include information 
regarding responsible parties and GENERAL methods for problem correction. In addition, provide information on 
the methods used by the state to document these items.
 
i. 
b. 
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 92 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 93]
If and when it is determined that the quality assurances are not being met, the DHCS will collect the data, 
aggregate the data, and present the findings to the providers with systems design change to correct and remediate 
the identified issues. 
 
The DHCS will provide these data and changes in a TA format for all concerned providers. 
The DHCS will also continue to provide direct TA to providers on a continuous basis as requested and when it is 
identified that there is a specific need for a given provider. 
 
Remediation: 
Within 60 days of discovery, any non-compliance will result in the DHCS contacting the provider to: 
• review the data; 
• determine etiology of non-compliance; 
• develop CAP with timeline; 
 
Resolution Follow-up: 
The DHCS will: 
• follow up to determine if the CAP was completed with successful outcome; 
• monitor the change(s) for continuing compliance; 
• determine etiology of non-compliance; 
• develop CAP with timeline.  
Remediation Data Aggregation
Remediation-related Data Aggregation and Analysis (including trend identification)
Responsible Party (check each that applies): Frequency of data aggregation and analysis
(check each that applies):
 State Medicaid Agency  Weekly
 Operating Agency  Monthly
 Sub-State Entity  Quarterly
 Other
Specify:
 
 
 
 Annually
 Continuously and Ongoing
 Other
Specify:
 
 
 
ii. 
Timelines
When the State does not have all elements of the Quality Improvement Strategy in place, provide timelines to design 
methods for discovery and remediation related to the assurance of Service Plans that are currently non-operational.
 No
 Yes
Please provide a detailed strategy for assuring Service Plans, the specific timeline for implementing identified 
strategies, and the parties responsible for its operation.
 
c. 
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 93 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 94]
Appendix E: Participant Direction of Services
Applicability  (from Application Section 3, Components of the Waiver Request) :
 Yes. This waiver provides participant direction opportunities.  Complete the remainder of the Appendix.
 No. This waiver does not provide participant direction opportunities.  Do not complete the remainder of the 
Appendix.
CMS urges states to afford all waiver participants the opportunity to direct their services. Participant direction of services 
includes the participant exercising decision-making authority over workers who provide services, a participant-managed budget 
or both. CMS will confer the Independence Plus designation when the waiver evidences a strong commitment to participant 
direction.
Indicate whether Independence Plus designation is requested  (select one):
 Yes. The state requests that this waiver be considered for Independence Plus designation.
 No. Independence Plus designation is not requested.
Appendix E: Participant Direction of Services
E-1: Overview (1 of 13)
Answers provided in Appendix E-0 indicate that you do not need to submit Appendix E.
Appendix E: Participant Direction of Services
E-1: Overview (2 of 13)
Answers provided in Appendix E-0 indicate that you do not need to submit Appendix E.
Appendix E: Participant Direction of Services
E-1: Overview (3 of 13)
Answers provided in Appendix E-0 indicate that you do not need to submit Appendix E.
Appendix E: Participant Direction of Services
E-1: Overview (4 of 13)
Answers provided in Appendix E-0 indicate that you do not need to submit Appendix E.
Appendix E: Participant Direction of Services
E-1: Overview (5 of 13)
Answers provided in Appendix E-0 indicate that you do not need to submit Appendix E.
Appendix E: Participant Direction of Services
E-1: Overview (6 of 13)
Answers provided in Appendix E-0 indicate that you do not need to submit Appendix E.
Appendix E: Participant Direction of Services
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 94 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 95]
E-1: Overview (7 of 13)
Answers provided in Appendix E-0 indicate that you do not need to submit Appendix E.
Appendix E: Participant Direction of Services
E-1: Overview (8 of 13)
Answers provided in Appendix E-0 indicate that you do not need to submit Appendix E.
Appendix E: Participant Direction of Services
E-1: Overview (9 of 13)
Answers provided in Appendix E-0 indicate that you do not need to submit Appendix E.
Appendix E: Participant Direction of Services
E-1: Overview (10 of 13)
Answers provided in Appendix E-0 indicate that you do not need to submit Appendix E.
Appendix E: Participant Direction of Services
E-1: Overview (11 of 13)
Answers provided in Appendix E-0 indicate that you do not need to submit Appendix E.
Appendix E: Participant Direction of Services
E-1: Overview (12 of 13)
Answers provided in Appendix E-0 indicate that you do not need to submit Appendix E.
Appendix E: Participant Direction of Services
E-1: Overview (13 of 13)
Answers provided in Appendix E-0 indicate that you do not need to submit Appendix E.
Appendix E: Participant Direction of Services
E-2: Opportunities for Participant Direction (1 of 6)
Answers provided in Appendix E-0 indicate that you do not need to submit Appendix E.
Appendix E: Participant Direction of Services
E-2: Opportunities for Participant-Direction (2 of 6)
Answers provided in Appendix E-0 indicate that you do not need to submit Appendix E.
Appendix E: Participant Direction of Services
E-2: Opportunities for Participant-Direction (3 of 6)
Answers provided in Appendix E-0 indicate that you do not need to submit Appendix E.
Appendix E: Participant Direction of Services
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 95 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 96]
E-2: Opportunities for Participant-Direction (4 of 6)
Answers provided in Appendix E-0 indicate that you do not need to submit Appendix E.
Appendix E: Participant Direction of Services
E-2: Opportunities for Participant-Direction (5 of 6)
Answers provided in Appendix E-0 indicate that you do not need to submit Appendix E.
Appendix E: Participant Direction of Services
E-2: Opportunities for Participant-Direction (6 of 6)
Answers provided in Appendix E-0 indicate that you do not need to submit Appendix E.
Appendix F: Participant Rights
Appendix F-1: Opportunity to Request a Fair Hearing
The state provides an opportunity to request a Fair Hearing under 42 CFR Part 431, Subpart E to individuals: (a) who are not 
given the choice of home and community-based services as an alternative to the institutional care specified in Item 1-F of the 
request; (b) are denied the service(s) of their choice or the provider(s) of their choice; or, (c) whose services are denied, 
suspended, reduced or terminated. The state provides notice of action as required in 42 CFR §431.210.
Procedures for Offering Opportunity to Request a Fair Hearing.  Describe how the individual (or his/her legal representative) 
is informed of the opportunity to request a fair hearing under 42 CFR Part 431, Subpart E. Specify the notice(s) that are used to 
offer individuals the opportunity to request a Fair Hearing. State laws, regulations, policies and notices referenced in the 
description are available to CMS upon request through the operating or Medicaid agency.
 
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 96 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 97]
The CCA is responsible for explaining to individuals, or their legal representative, the services offered through the waiver. 
CCAs can help individuals make decisions about their choices of living arrangements by explaining the differences between 
receiving long-term services and supports in a nursing facility and in an RCFE/ARF or public subsidized housing setting.  The 
CCA is also responsible for informing individuals about resources available to them to determine financial eligibility for long-
term services and supports. 
 
The Care Coordination Agency Provider Handbook is available to download from the Department of Health Services’ ALW 
internet home page.  The handbook provides guidance to ensure that: 
 
• Potential participants, their legal representatives, relatives, or involved persons are informed of the choice of either participating 
or not participating in the ALW program, if the beneficiary is determined to be eligible for the ALW. 
 
• Individuals are informed regarding the ALW’s informal grievance procedures and formal appeal rights, termination procedures, 
and rights to refuse or discontinue services. 
 
• There is an understanding that it is the Department of Health Care Services’ responsibility, when an individual is denied waiver 
services, or when waiver services are reduced or terminated, to forward a Notice of Action (NOA) to the individual, or his/her 
legal representative.  The NOA contains an explanation for the reason the State is denying, reducing, or terminating services, and 
provides information on how to ask for a State Hearing, and how to get questions answered, including telephone numbers for 
free legal aid. 
 
• The individual’s choice is documented on the Freedom of Choice document. 
 
State Hearings are coordinated and conducted by the California Department of Social Services.  Final authority for the adoption 
of decisions rests with the Director of the Department of Health Care Services, as per Delegation Order #94-151. 
 
California will fully comply with the requirements of 42 CFR Part 431, Subpart E. Fair hearings will be conducted through the 
Medicaid Fair Hearing process.  Notices of Action are issued in compliance with the CCR §51014.1 (Fair Hearing Related to 
Denial, Termination or Reduction in Medical Services). 
 
 
Notice of Action (NOA) Process: 
 
Upon denial of initial enrollment into the ALW program, or when a service has not been approved as requested, is reduced, 
terminated, or denied, DHCS will issue a NOA, “State Fair Hearing Notice Request” form, and the informational letter “Your 
Right to Appeal the Notice of Action.” The NOA, hearing request form, and the informational letter are mailed to the participant 
or his/her legal representative/legally responsible adult(s) by DHCS. 
 
In the event of a reduction or termination of continuous and previously authorized services, the DHCS mails the NOA, hearing 
request form, and informational letter to the participant and/or his/her legal representative/legally responsible adult(s), the 
participant’s current primary care physician, and the waiver service provider within 10 calendar days of the effective date of the 
action. 
 
The NOA advises the participant of DHCS’ decision and the reason(s) to: 1) terminate or deny waiver enrollment; 2) reduce or 
terminate previously authorized waiver services; or 3) deny new or previously authorized waiver services. The NOA includes 
instructions advising the participant and/or his/her authorized representative(s) on how to request a State Fair Hearing before an 
Administrative Law Judge (ALJ). The participant must request a State Fair Hearing within 90 calendar days after the date the 
NOA is mailed to the participant. 
 
If the request for a State Fair Hearing is submitted to the DSS Hearings Division prior to the expiration date printed at the top of 
the NOA, or within ten (10) calendar days of the date of the notice, the participant’s waiver enrollment and/or previously 
authorized services will continue without interruption. The participant and/or his/her legal representative/legally responsible 
adult(s) are responsible for submitting the request for a State Fair Hearing before the action takes place. A copy of the NOA and 
the fair hearing request form is filed in the participant’s case record maintained by DHCS. 
 
State Plan and waiver services unaffected by the NOA will continue to be provided as authorized. The participant’s Medi-Cal 
eligibility is not affected by a NOA, unless the NOA was issued because the participant no longer met the waiver requirements or 
LOC, the participant obtained his/her Medi-Cal eligibility through the waiver’s income and resource eligibility requirements, or 
the participant no longer met regular Medi-Cal eligibility requirements. 
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 97 of 148
11/01/2023
the NOA, or within ten (10) calendar days of the date of the notice, the participants waiver enrollment and/or previously authorized 
services will continue without interruption. The participant and/or his/her legal representative/legally responsible adult(s) 
are responsible for submitting the request for a State Fair Hearing before the action takes place. A copy of the NOA the fair 
hearing request form is filed in the participants case record maintained by DHCS. 
State Plan and waiver services unaffected by the NOA will continue to be provided as authorized. The participants Medi-Cal eligibility 
is not affected by a NOA, unless the NOA was issued because the participant no longer met the waiver requirements or LOC, 
the participant obtained his/her Medi-Cal eligibility through the waivers income and resource eligibility requirements, or the participant 
no longer met regular Medi-Cal eligibility requirements.

[page 98]
State Fair Hearing Process: 
 
Upon request of a State Fair Hearing, DHCS staff will contact the applicant or participant and/or his/her legal 
representative/legally responsible adult(s) to provide them with additional information on the State Fair Hearing process, and 
advise them they will receive DHCS’ written position statement before the scheduled hearing date. If the participant and/or 
his/her legal representative/legally responsible adult(s) have not identified legal representation, DHCS will refer the participant 
and/or his/her legal representative/legally responsible adult(s) to the toll-free phone number on the back of the NOA for 
information regarding hearing rights, free legal aid, and information regarding Protection and Advocacy, Inc. DHCS will 
continue to work with the participant and/or his/her legal representative/legally responsible adult(s) to resolve the hearing issues 
before the scheduled date of the hearing. If a hearing is held and the DHCS Director’s Decision upholds DHCS’ action to reduce, 
terminate, or deny continued enrollment in the waiver and/or a waiver service(s), any aid paid pending the participant had been 
receiving will stop. 
 
The participant may request a rehearing. Instructions on how to request a rehearing, and the grounds upon which a rehearing can 
be requested, are included with the ALJ’s written decision. To request a rehearing, the participant must mail a written request to 
the address indicated in the instructions within 30 calendar days of the final decision. The participant must state the date the 
decision was received and the reason(s) why a rehearing should be granted. A request may be granted if the participant submits 
evidence that was not reasonably available at the time of the hearing that could change the outcome of the original decision. The 
Director may deny the request, or order the ALJ to conduct a rehearing on one, several, or all issues that were presented for 
review in the original State Fair Hearing. 
 
If the participant is unsatisfied with the outcome of the original hearing or rehearing, s/he can elect to seek judicial review by 
filing a petition in Superior Court within one year of receiving notice of the final decision adopted by the DHCS Director. The 
participant may file this petition without first requesting a rehearing.  
Appendix F: Participant-Rights
Appendix F-2: Additional Dispute Resolution Process
Availability of Additional Dispute Resolution Process.  Indicate whether the state operates another dispute resolution 
process that offers participants the opportunity to appeal decisions that adversely affect their services while preserving 
their right to a Fair Hearing. Select one:
 No. This Appendix does not apply
 Yes. The state operates an additional dispute resolution process
a. 
Description of Additional Dispute Resolution Process.  Describe the additional dispute resolution process, including: (a) 
the state agency that operates the process; (b) the nature of the process (i.e., procedures and timeframes), including the 
types of disputes addressed through the process; and, (c) how the right to a Medicaid Fair Hearing is preserved when a 
participant elects to make use of the process: State laws, regulations, and policies referenced in the description are 
available to CMS upon request through the operating or Medicaid agency.
 
 
 
b. 
Appendix F: Participant-Rights
Appendix F-3: State Grievance/Complaint System
Operation of Grievance/Complaint System.  Select one:
 No. This Appendix does not apply
 Yes. The state operates a grievance/complaint system that affords participants the opportunity to register 
grievances or complaints concerning the provision of services under this waiver
a. 
Operational Responsibility.  Specify the state agency that is responsible for the operation of the grievance/complaint b. 
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 98 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 99]
system:
 
 
 
Description of System.  Describe the grievance/complaint system, including: (a) the types of grievances/complaints that 
participants may register; (b) the process and timelines for addressing grievances/complaints; and, (c) the mechanisms that 
are used to resolve grievances/complaints. State laws, regulations, and policies referenced in the description are available 
to CMS upon request through the Medicaid agency or the operating agency (if applicable).
 
 
 
c. 
Appendix G: Participant Safeguards
Appendix G-1: Response to Critical Events or Incidents
Critical Event or Incident Reporting and Management Process.  Indicate whether the state operates Critical Event or 
Incident Reporting and Management Process that enables the state to collect information on sentinel events occurring in 
the waiver program. Select one:
 Yes. The state operates a Critical Event or Incident Reporting and Management Process  (complete Items b 
through e)
 No. This Appendix does not apply  (do not complete Items b through e)
If the state does not operate a Critical Event or Incident Reporting and Management Process, describe the process that 
the state uses to elicit information on the health and welfare of individuals served through the program.
 
 
 
a. 
State Critical Event or Incident Reporting Requirements. Specify the types of critical events or incidents (including 
alleged abuse, neglect and exploitation) that the state requires to be reported for review and follow-up action by an 
appropriate authority, the individuals and/or entities that are required to report such events and incidents and the timelines 
for reporting. State laws, regulations, and policies that are referenced are available to CMS upon request through the 
Medicaid agency or the operating agency (if applicable).
 
b. 
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 99 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 100]
The RCFE/ARFs and are required to submit Serious Incident Reports (SIR) to CCL as per Title 22. For the purposes of 
the ALW, the RCFE/ARF and HHA providers are required to submit a SIR to the CCA and DHCS within 24 hours of 
occurrence.  A routine SIR may be submitted within 72 hours. 
 
CCR Title 22§ 87211 
 
a) Each licensee shall furnish to the licensing agency such reports as the Department may require, including, but not 
limited to, the following: 
 
1) A written report shall be submitted to the licensing agency and to the person responsible for the resident within seven 
days of the occurrence of any of the events specified in (A) through (D) below.  This report shall include the resident's 
name, age, sex and date of admission; date and nature of event; attending physician's name, findings, and treatment, if 
any; and disposition of the case. 
   (A) Death of any resident from any cause regardless of where the death occurred, including but not limited to a day 
program, a hospital, en route to or from a hospital, or visiting away from the facility. 
 
   (B) Any serious injury as determined by the attending physician and occurring while the resident is under facility 
supervision. 
 
    C) The use of an Automated External Defibrillator. 
 
   (D) Any incident which threatens the welfare, safety or health of any resident, such as physical or psychological abuse 
of a resident by staff or other residents, or unexplained absence of any resident. 
      (2) Occurrences, such as epidemic outbreaks, poisonings, catastrophes or major accidents which threaten the welfare, 
safety or health of residents, personnel or visitors, shall be reported within 24 hours either by telephone or facsimile to the 
licensing agency and to the local health officer when appropriate. 
      (3) Fires or explosions, which occur in or on the premises shall be reported immediately to the local fire authority; in 
areas not having organized fire services, within 24 hours to the State Fire Marshal; and no later than the next working day 
to the licensing agency. 
 
DHCS requires RCFE/ARFs and HHAs to submit incident reports to the CCA and DHCS within 24 hours of occurrence 
for serious incidents or issues, or 72 hours for less serious issues. 
1. 	 CCAs e-mail incident reports to the state via a dedicated e-mail box (ALWP.IR@dhcs.ca.gov) which can only be 
accessed by the ALW Unit staff. 
2. 	 Incident reports are reviewed by ALW RN staff. 
3. 	 ALW RNs follow up with CCAs as needed. 
4. 	 The ALW team informs the California Department of Social Services Community Care Licensing Division when it 
has been determined that an RCFE/ARF is restricted from enrolling additional waiver participants. 
5. 	 Incident report data is entered into a spreadsheet for tracking purposes and analyzed for trends on an annual basis. 
DHCS tracks incident reporting activity in the ALW database.  The date, type and disposition of the incidents are tracked 
on a continuous basis.  
Participant Training and Education. Describe how training and/or information is provided to participants (and/or 
families or legal representatives, as appropriate) concerning protections from abuse, neglect, and exploitation, including 
how participants (and/or families or legal representatives, as appropriate) can notify appropriate authorities or entities 
when the participant may have experienced abuse, neglect or exploitation.
 
The CCA will be responsible for participant training and education.  The CCA will discuss with and provide the 
participant with information regarding abuse, neglect, or exploitation; how to recognize if any of these occur; and whom 
to contact to report such events/incidents.  The CCA will provide additional training as necessary.  The CCA is a 
mandated Adult Protective Services (APS) reporter. 
 
The RCFE/ARF is mandated to post the contact information for the Ombudsman in the facility.  The CCA conducts an 
independent quality assurance visit monthly with the participant and completes a reassessment every six months.  
c. 
Responsibility for Review of and Response to Critical Events or Incidents. Specify the entity (or entities) that receives d. 
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 100 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 101]
reports of critical events or incidents specified in item G-1-a, the methods that are employed to evaluate such reports, and 
the processes and time-frames for responding to critical events or incidents, including conducting investigations.
 
The RCFE/ARF and HHA are required to send a SIR to CCL or L&C within 24 hours respectively.  The CCA forwards 
the SIR to the DHCS. 
 
DHCS will investigate when the waiver provider fails to: 
• Report abuse or neglect of a waiver participant; 
• Notify the physician of a change in the participant’s condition, if the participant is harmed by the failure of this action; 
• Inform the participant of their rights; 
• Provide waiver services as described in the participant's ISP; 
• Provide adequate notification to the participant when services are changed or terminated; 
• Act within their professional scope of practice (if verified, L&C will re-direct to licensing entity); 
• Report suspected or verified medication misuse. 
 
Within 30 days of the identification of a trend or pattern of critical events, the provider will be given TA as the nature and 
severity of the issue.  The DHCS will follow up within the next 30 days to assure that the issue is ameliorated.  In the 
event that the problem persists, the DHCS will issue a CAP with a 60-90 day timeframe for remediation.  In the event that 
the provider is unable to fulfill the conditions of the CAP, the provider will be suspended from further waiver enrollment 
and disallowed from enrolling additional waiver participants.  In the event that the provider continues to fail to assure the 
health and safety of the participants, the DHCS will work in conjunction with CCL, L&C or Medi-Cal Provider 
Enrollment in the consideration of suspension of the RCFE/ARF, HHA license or suspension of a CCAs Medi-Cal billing 
privileges. 
 
DHCS will notify the participant, their family or representative of any investigative results within 24 hours of completion 
of any investigation.  
Responsibility for Oversight of Critical Incidents and Events. Identify the state agency (or agencies) responsible for 
overseeing the reporting of and response to critical incidents or events that affect waiver participants, how this oversight is 
conducted, and how frequently.
 
The CCA is the first line of quality assurance and is responsible for intervening in the behalf of the participant in the 
event of a significant event.  The SIR is submitted to L&C (HHAs) or CCL (RCFE/ARFs). CCA’s are to submit all 
incident reports effecting health and safety to the following DHCS email, ALWP.IR@dhcs.ca.gov within 24 hours of a 
serious incident or 72 hours for less serious incidents.  DHCS then reviews, logs, and downloads the report to the 
beneficiary’s profile in the MedCompass data collection system.  Reports for any period can be run by DHCS using 
MedCompass.  Beneficiaries with an incident report in the system will populate on the report. The dedicated email box is 
monitored daily for all incoming incident reports.  DHCS and CCAs work together to monitor serious incident activity 
and resolution.  The DHCS Compliance Unit checks for compliance issues regarding documentation and submission 
timeliness during the annual provider visits. 
 
The DHCS follows up with the CCA to monitor remediation and prevention of further similar events for the participantas 
indicated above. 
 
In the event that the provider continues to demonstrate the inability to meet the requirements of a waiver provider, the 
provider shall be disenrolled as a waiver provider and the participants transferred to another locale within 30 days as per 
CCL.  
e. 
Appendix G: Participant Safeguards
Appendix G-2: Safeguards Concerning Restraints and Restrictive Interventions (1 of 
3)
Use of Restraints.  (Select one) : (For waiver actions submitted before March 2014, responses in Appendix G-2-a will 
display information for both restraints and seclusion. For most waiver actions submitted after March 2014, responses 
regarding seclusion appear in Appendix G-2-c.)
a. 
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 101 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 102]
The state does not permit or prohibits the use of restraints
Specify the state agency (or agencies) responsible for detecting the unauthorized use of restraints and how this 
oversight is conducted and its frequency:
 
The Department of Social Services Community Care Licensing Division (CCLD) under the authority of the Health 
and Safety Code and California Code of Regulations Title 22 (22CCR) Section 80072 states, “(a) Except for 
children's residential facilities, each client shall have personal rights which include, but are not limited to, the 
following: (8) Not to be placed in any restraining device.”  The use of restraints in Community Care Facilities is 
prohibited.  The (CCLD) is mandated to conduct unannounced annual inspections, unannounced complaint 
inspections, and may conduct unannounced random visits as a follow-up to incidents or when the CCLD is 
concerned about the health and safety of residents.  Additionally, depending on the severity of any violation(s) that 
result in deficiencies, civil penalties and/or action by the Department against the license and to the licensee.  
 The use of restraints is permitted during the course of the delivery of waiver services . Complete Items G-2-a-i 
and G-2-a-ii.
Safeguards Concerning the Use of Restraints.  Specify the safeguards that the state has established 
concerning the use of each type of restraint (i.e., personal restraints, drugs used as restraints, mechanical 
restraints). State laws, regulations, and policies that are referenced are available to CMS upon request through 
the Medicaid agency or the operating agency (if applicable).
 
 
 
i. 
State Oversight Responsibility.  Specify the state agency (or agencies) responsible for overseeing the use of 
restraints and ensuring that state safeguards concerning their use are followed and how such oversight is 
conducted and its frequency:
 
 
 
ii. 
Appendix G: Participant Safeguards
Appendix G-2: Safeguards Concerning Restraints and Restrictive Interventions (2 of 
3)
Use of Restrictive Interventions.  (Select one) :
 The state does not permit or prohibits the use of restrictive interventions
Specify the state agency (or agencies) responsible for detecting the unauthorized use of restrictive interventions and 
how this oversight is conducted and its frequency:
 
DSS CCL is the licensing and regulatory authority for the RCFE/ARF. CCL enforces the regulatory language 
prohibiting unlawful restraints. CDPH L&C is responsible for the regulatory management and oversight of the 
HHA. L&C enforces the regulatory language regarding unlawful restraints. 
 
The Department of Social Services Community Care Licensing Division (CCLD) under the authority of the Health 
and Safety Code and California Code of Regulations Title 22 (22CCR) monitors the health and safety of residents by 
conducting unannounced annual inspections, unannounced complaint inspections, and may conduct unannounced 
random visits as a follow-up to incidents or when the CCLD is concerned about the health and safety of residents. 
Additionally, depending on the severity of the violation(s) that result in deficiencies, civil penalties and/or action by 
the Department against the license and to the licensee.  
b. 
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 102 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 103]
The use of restrictive interventions is permitted during the course of the delivery of waiver services  Complete 
Items G-2-b-i and G-2-b-ii.
Safeguards Concerning the Use of Restrictive Interventions. Specify the safeguards that the state has in 
effect concerning the use of interventions that restrict participant movement, participant access to other 
individuals, locations or activities, restrict participant rights or employ aversive methods (not including 
restraints or seclusion) to modify behavior. State laws, regulations, and policies referenced in the specification 
are available to CMS upon request through the Medicaid agency or the operating agency.
 
 
 
i. 
State Oversight Responsibility.  Specify the state agency (or agencies) responsible for monitoring and 
overseeing the use of restrictive interventions and how this oversight is conducted and its frequency:
 
 
 
ii. 
Appendix G: Participant Safeguards
Appendix G-2: Safeguards Concerning Restraints and Restrictive Interventions (3 of 
3)
Use of Seclusion.  (Select one) : (This section will be blank for waivers submitted before Appendix G-2-c was added to 
WMS in March 2014, and responses for seclusion will display in Appendix G-2-a combined with information on 
restraints.)
 The state does not permit or prohibits the use of seclusion
Specify the state agency (or agencies) responsible for detecting the unauthorized use of seclusion and how this 
oversight is conducted and its frequency:
 
The State monitors the use of exclusion through review of the Individualized Service Plans (ISPs), during biennial 
Quality Assurance site visits, and through the Utilization Review process. 
 
The Department of Social Services Community Care Licensing Division (CCLD) under the authority of the Health 
and Safety Code and California Code of Regulations Title 22 (22CCR).  The use of seclusion in not allowed in 
community care facilities.  Should the practice of seclusion be found during an inspection or via compliant would 
result in a violation of a resident’s personal rights to be free of involuntary seclusion per Section 87468. 
Additionally, depending on the severity of the violation(s) that result in deficiencies, civil penalties and/or action by 
the Department against the license and to the licensee.  
 The use of seclusion is permitted during the course of the delivery of waiver services . Complete Items G-2-c-i 
and G-2-c-ii.
Safeguards Concerning the Use of Seclusion.  Specify the safeguards that the state has established 
concerning the use of each type of seclusion. State laws, regulations, and policies that are referenced are 
available to CMS upon request through the Medicaid agency or the operating agency (if applicable).
 
 
 
i. 
State Oversight Responsibility.  Specify the state agency (or agencies) responsible for overseeing the use of 
seclusion and ensuring that state safeguards concerning their use are followed and how such oversight is 
ii. 
c. 
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 103 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 104]
conducted and its frequency:
 
 
 
Appendix G: Participant Safeguards
Appendix G-3: Medication Management and Administration (1 of 2)
This Appendix must be completed when waiver services are furnished to participants who are served in licensed or unlicensed 
living arrangements where a provider has round-the-clock responsibility for the health and welfare of residents. The Appendix 
does not need to be completed when waiver participants are served exclusively in their own personal residences or in the home of 
a family member.
Applicability.  Select one:
 No. This Appendix is not applicable  (do not complete the remaining items)
 Yes. This Appendix applies  (complete the remaining items)
a. 
Medication Management and Follow-Up
Responsibility.  Specify the entity (or entities) that have ongoing responsibility for monitoring participant 
medication regimens, the methods for conducting monitoring, and the frequency of monitoring.
 
The RCFE/ARF is responsible for medication management for the participants unless the participant has a 
physician order to self-manage his/her medication(s). Medications are maintained in the Medication Room of the 
RCFE/ARF and accessed only by the designated staff.  The oversight and management of medications is under 
the auspices of the CCL. 
 
In the PSH setting, the participant has responsibility for the maintenance and safeguards of his/her medication. 
The HHA will assist or administer medications by licensed staff as necessary. 
 
As of January 1, 2019, the Community Care Licensing Division’s (CCLD) Adult and Senior Care Program 
(ASCP) is mandated to conduct annual visits to all Community Care Facilities, including Residential Care 
Facilities for the Elderly (RCFE), including those participating in the ALW.  CCLD will review medications 
during the unannounced annual inspection, during random unannounced inspections, when medications are 
involved during a complaint investigation, and whenever CCLD is concerned about the health and safety of 
residents as it pertains to medications. 
 
The Department of Social Services Community Care Licensing Division (CCLD) under the authority of the 
Health and Safety Code and California Code of Regulations Title 22 (22CCR) monitors the health and safety of 
residents by conducting unannounced annual visits, unannounced complaint investigations, and may conduct 
unannounced random visits as a follow-up to incidents or when the CCLD is concerned about the health and 
safety of residents.  Additionally, should a violation of 22CCR be found, the licensee shall receive a deficiency, 
which may result in civil penalties.  
i. 
Methods of State Oversight and Follow-Up.  Describe: (a) the method(s) that the state uses to ensure that 
participant medications are managed appropriately, including: (a) the identification of potentially harmful practices 
(e.g., the concurrent use of contraindicated medications); (b) the method(s) for following up on potentially harmful 
practices; and, (c) the state agency (or agencies) that is responsible for follow-up and oversight.
 
ii. 
b. 
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 104 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 105]
In the RCFE/ARF setting, the state oversight is provided by the CCA staff.  The CCA provides a QA component 
with the CCA RN review of medications during the semi-annual assessment. 
 
CCL employs Licensing Program Analysts (LPAs) to inspect and regulate the RCFE/ARF.  The LPAs inspect the 
medication room and ensure that the providers are compliant with the regulations governing the storage, 
administration and documentation of medications.  The CCA monitors to ensure that the participants are receiving 
their medications as per the physician's orders.  
Appendix G: Participant Safeguards
Appendix G-3: Medication Management and Administration (2 of 2)
Medication Administration by Waiver Providers
Provider Administration of Medications.  Select one:
 Not applicable.  (do not complete the remaining items)
 Waiver providers are responsible for the administration of medications to waiver participants who 
cannot self-administer and/or have responsibility to oversee participant self-administration of 
medications.  (complete the remaining items)
i. 
State Policy.  Summarize the state policies that apply to the administration of medications by waiver providers or 
waiver provider responsibilities when participants self-administer medications, including (if applicable) policies 
concerning medication administration by non-medical waiver provider personnel. State laws, regulations, and 
policies referenced in the specification are available to CMS upon request through the Medicaid agency or the 
operating agency (if applicable).
 
The RCFE/ARF utilizes medication technicians to assist participants with medications, but the technicians may 
not administer medications.  Under California law, only a licensed nurse (or physician) may administer a 
medication. 
 
The RCFE/ARF has the ability to assist participants to the extent of passing medications or opening syringes and 
handing them to the participant, but the participant must have the ability to self-administer the medication or the 
services of a licensed nurse are required.  This requirement is enforced by CCL. 
 
Under the ALW, both RCFE/ARF and HHA providers are required to have skilled nursing staff sufficient to meet 
the skilled nursing needs of the participant.  If the participant is unable to take medication with assistance, the 
RCFE/ARF or the HHA is responsible for providing the licensed nurse as needed. 
 
As of January 1, 2019, the Community Care Licensing Division’s (CCLD) Adult and Senior Care Program 
(ASCP) is mandated to conduct annual visits to all Community Care Facilities, including Residential Care 
Facilities for the Elderly (RCFE), including those participating in the ALW.  CCLD will review medications 
during the unannounced annual inspection, during random unannounced inspections, when medications are 
involved during a complaint investigation, and whenever CCLD is concerned about the health and safety of 
residents as it pertains to medications.  
ii. 
Medication Error Reporting.  Select one of the following:
 Providers that are responsible for medication administration are required to both record and report 
medication errors to a state agency (or agencies).
Complete the following three items:
(a) Specify state agency (or agencies) to which errors are reported:
 
The RCF reports to the CCL and the HHA reports to the L&C.  
iii. 
c. 
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 105 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 106]
(b) Specify the types of medication errors that providers are required to record:
 
All medication errors are recorded.  
(c) Specify the types of medication errors that providers must report  to the state:
 
All medication errors are reported.  
 Providers responsible for medication administration are required to record medication errors but make 
information about medication errors available only when requested by the state.
Specify the types of medication errors that providers are required to record:
 
 
 
State Oversight Responsibility.  Specify the state agency (or agencies) responsible for monitoring the performance 
of waiver providers in the administration of medications to waiver participants and how monitoring is performed 
and its frequency.
 
The RCFE/ARF reports to the CCL and the HHA reports to the L&C. 
 
CCL visits all of the RCFE/ARFs participating in the ALW annually. DHCS visits the RCFE/ARF annually. 
 
The HHA is visited annually by L&C. 
 
When CCLD issues a deficiency or conducts a visit, a report must be given to the licensee for records and for 
posting in the facility.  Once a report is issued, it uploaded to their transparency website, which is refreshed 
weekly.  DHCS is registered for ALW facilities so an automatic updates is sent to DHCS whenever a report is 
uploaded. In addition, the DHCS is in communications with DSS about serious issues whenever the CCLD is 
taking an action on a facility.  The Department continues to collaborate with the DSS on oversight activities in 
ALW RCFEs.  
iv. 
Appendix G: Participant Safeguards
Quality Improvement: Health and Welfare
As a distinct component of the States quality improvement strategy, provide information in the following fields to detail the States 
methods for discovery and remediation.
Methods for Discovery: Health and Welfare
The state demonstrates it has designed and implemented an effective system for assuring waiver participant health and 
welfare. (For waiver actions submitted before June 1, 2014, this assurance read "The State, on an ongoing basis, 
identifies, addresses, and seeks to prevent the occurrence of abuse, neglect and exploitation.")
Sub-Assurances:
Sub-assurance: The state demonstrates on an ongoing basis that it identifies, addresses and seeks to 
prevent instancesof abuse, neglect, exploitation and unexplained death. (Performance measures in this 
sub-assurance include all Appendix G performance measures for waiver actions submitted before June 1, 
2014.)
Performance Measures
For each performance measure the State will use to assess compliance with the statutory assurance (or 
a. 
i. 
a. 
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 106 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 107]
sub-assurance), complete the following. Where possible, include numerator/denominator.
For each performance measure, provide information on the aggregated data that will enable the State to 
analyze and assess progress toward the performance measure. In this section provide information on the 
method by which each source of data is analyzed statistically/deductively or inductively, how themes are 
identified or conclusions drawn, and how recommendations are formulated, where appropriate.
Performance Measure:
Health and Welfare Number and percent of Serious Incident Reports (SIR) involving 
occurrences of abuse, neglect, or exploitation Numerator: number of SIRs the state 
identified and addressed involving substantiated occurrences of abuse, neglect, or 
exploitation. Denominator: total number of all reported incidents.
Data Source  (Select one):
Critical events and incident reports
If 'Other' is selected, specify:
Responsible Party for 
data 
collection/generation
(check each that applies):
Frequency of data 
collection/generation
(check each that applies):
Sampling Approach
(check each that applies):
 State Medicaid 
Agency
 Weekly  100% Review
 Operating Agency  Monthly  Less than 100% 
Review
 Sub-State Entity  Quarterly  Representative 
Sample
Confidence 
Interval =
 
 
 
 Other
Specify:
 
 
 
 Annually  Stratified
Describe Group:
 
 
 
 Continuously and 
Ongoing
 Other
Specify:
 
 
 
 Other
Specify:
 
 
 
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 107 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 108]
Data Aggregation and Analysis:
Responsible Party for data 
aggregation and analysis (check each 
that applies):
Frequency of data aggregation and 
analysis (check each that applies):
 State Medicaid Agency  Weekly
 Operating Agency  Monthly
 Sub-State Entity  Quarterly
 Other
Specify:
 
 
 
 Annually
 Continuously and Ongoing
 Other
Specify:
 
 
 
Sub-assurance: The state demonstrates that an incident management system is in place that effectively 
resolves those incidents and prevents further similar incidents to the extent possible.
Performance Measures
For each performance measure the State will use to assess compliance with the statutory assurance (or 
sub-assurance), complete the following. Where possible, include numerator/denominator.
For each performance measure, provide information on the aggregated data that will enable the State to 
analyze and assess progress toward the performance measure. In this section provide information on the 
method by which each source of data is analyzed statistically/deductively or inductively, how themes are 
identified or conclusions drawn, and how recommendations are formulated, where appropriate.
Performance Measure:
% of cases reviewed with documentation CCA has recognizing instances of 
abuse,neglect or exploitation with the participant/other responsible person reflecting 
resolution.Numerator:number of cases reviewed with documentation CCA discussed 
recognizing instances of abuse,neglect or exploitation with participant/other 
responsible person.Denominator:number of cases reviewed reflecting a resolution.
Data Source  (Select one):
Record reviews, on-site
If 'Other' is selected, specify:
Responsible Party for 
data 
collection/generation
(check each that applies):
Frequency of data 
collection/generation
(check each that applies):
Sampling Approach
(check each that applies):
b. 
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 108 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 109]
State Medicaid 
Agency
 Weekly  100% Review
 Operating Agency  Monthly  Less than 100% 
Review
 Sub-State Entity  Quarterly  Representative 
Sample
Confidence 
Interval =
 
 
 
 Other
Specify:
 
 
 
 Annually  Stratified
Describe Group:
 
 
 
 Continuously and 
Ongoing
 Other
Specify:
 
 
 
 Other
Specify:
 
 
 
Data Aggregation and Analysis:
Responsible Party for data 
aggregation and analysis (check each 
that applies):
Frequency of data aggregation and 
analysis (check each that applies):
 State Medicaid Agency  Weekly
 Operating Agency  Monthly
 Sub-State Entity  Quarterly
 Other
Specify:
 
 
 
 Annually
 Continuously and Ongoing
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 109 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 110]
Responsible Party for data 
aggregation and analysis (check each 
that applies):
Frequency of data aggregation and 
analysis (check each that applies):
 Other
Specify:
 
 
 
Sub-assurance: The state policies and procedures for the use or prohibition of restrictive interventions 
(including restraints and seclusion) are followed.
Performance Measures
For each performance measure the State will use to assess compliance with the statutory assurance (or 
sub-assurance), complete the following. Where possible, include numerator/denominator.
For each performance measure, provide information on the aggregated data that will enable the State to 
analyze and assess progress toward the performance measure. In this section provide information on the 
method by which each source of data is analyzed statistically/deductively or inductively, how themes are 
identified or conclusions drawn, and how recommendations are formulated, where appropriate.
Performance Measure:
All reviewed ISP do not include orders for use of restraints or seclusion. Numerator: 
number of files that do not include orders for use of restraints or seclusion. 
Denominator: Total number of files reviewed.
Data Source  (Select one):
Record reviews, on-site
If 'Other' is selected, specify:
Responsible Party for 
data 
collection/generation
(check each that applies):
Frequency of data 
collection/generation
(check each that applies):
Sampling Approach
(check each that applies):
 State Medicaid 
Agency
 Weekly  100% Review
 Operating Agency  Monthly  Less than 100% 
Review
 Sub-State Entity  Quarterly  Representative 
Sample
Confidence 
Interval =
 
 
 
 Other
Specify:
 Stratified
Describe Group:
 Annually
c. 
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 110 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 111]
Continuously and 
Ongoing
 Other
Specify:
 
 
 
 Other
Specify:
 
 
 
Data Aggregation and Analysis:
Responsible Party for data 
aggregation and analysis (check each 
that applies):
Frequency of data aggregation and 
analysis (check each that applies):
 State Medicaid Agency  Weekly
 Operating Agency  Monthly
 Sub-State Entity  Quarterly
 Other
Specify:
 
 
 
 Annually
 Continuously and Ongoing
 Other
Specify:
 
 
 
Sub-assurance: The state establishes overall health care standards and monitors those standards based 
on the responsibility of the service provider as stated in the approved waiver.
Performance Measures
For each performance measure the State will use to assess compliance with the statutory assurance (or 
sub-assurance), complete the following. Where possible, include numerator/denominator.
For each performance measure, provide information on the aggregated data that will enable the State to 
d. 
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 111 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 112]
analyze and assess progress toward the performance measure. In this section provide information on the 
method by which each source of data is analyzed statistically/deductively or inductively, how themes are 
identified or conclusions drawn, and how recommendations are formulated, where appropriate.
Performance Measure:
The state monitors overall health care standards based on the approved waiver. 
Numerator: Cases reviewed that meet standards. Denominator: Total cases reviewed
Data Source  (Select one):
Record reviews, on-site
If 'Other' is selected, specify:
Responsible Party for 
data 
collection/generation
(check each that applies):
Frequency of data 
collection/generation
(check each that applies):
Sampling Approach
(check each that applies):
 State Medicaid 
Agency
 Weekly  100% Review
 Operating Agency  Monthly  Less than 100% 
Review
 Sub-State Entity  Quarterly  Representative 
Sample
Confidence 
Interval =
 
 
 
 Other
Specify:
 
 
 
 Annually  Stratified
Describe Group:
 
 
 
 Continuously and 
Ongoing
 Other
Specify:
 
 
 
 Other
Specify:
 
 
 
Data Aggregation and Analysis:
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 112 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 113]
Responsible Party for data 
aggregation and analysis (check each 
that applies):
Frequency of data aggregation and 
analysis (check each that applies):
 State Medicaid Agency  Weekly
 Operating Agency  Monthly
 Sub-State Entity  Quarterly
 Other
Specify:
 
 
 
 Annually
 Continuously and Ongoing
 Other
Specify:
 
 
 
If applicable, in the textbox below provide any necessary additional information on the strategies employed by the 
State to discover/identify problems/issues within the waiver program, including frequency and parties responsible.
 
The direct providers of the assisted living services are held accountable to assure the health and safety of all 
participants in their care.  The CCA provides the framework for that assurance within the ISP.  The CCA also 
conducts the monthly visit and reassessment every six months to assure that the needs of the participant are being 
met.  The DHCS conducts a 100% review of the documents submitted and a biennial QA audit to assure that the 
health and safety of the participants is not jeopardized.  The DHCS retains the authority to restrict enrollment to 
by any provider of whom there is a question or concern in this regard.  The DHCS retains the authority to 
disenroll any provider who fails to respond to remediation and TA in this regard. 
Discovery: 
Monitoring/Prevention 
The DHCS will annually review a random sample of CCA, HHA and RCFE/ARF files to verify documentation of 
continuous monitoring of: 
• participant risk and risk management, preventative measures to assure health and safety as indicated by the ISP 
• information provided regarding abuse, neglect and exploitation. 
 
Abuse/Neglect 
The DHCS will review the SIRs as submitted by the providers to verify that suspicion of or observed acts of 
abuse, neglect and exploitation were identified and immediate appropriate action was taken. 
 
Incidents/Complaints 
The DHCS will review the SIRs with L&C and CCL as appropriate.  
ii. 
Methods for Remediation/Fixing Individual Problems
Describe the States method for addressing individual problems as they are discovered. Include information 
regarding responsible parties and GENERAL methods for problem correction. In addition, provide information on 
the methods used by the state to document these items.
 
i. 
b. 
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 113 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 114]
Remediation: 
Monitoring/Prevention 
• The DHCS will notify the provider upon discovery of failure to meet requirements for continuous monitoring 
and develop a corrective action plan. 
 
Abuse/Neglect, Incidents/Complaints 
• Immediately upon discovery of inappropriate or untimely action in response to a report, the DHCS will notify 
the responsible party to develop a corrective action plan. 
 
Resolution Follow-up: 
The DHCS will: 
• Follow up to determine if the corrective action was completed 
• Monitor the change(s) for continuing compliance.  
Remediation Data Aggregation
Remediation-related Data Aggregation and Analysis (including trend identification)
Responsible Party (check each that 
applies):
Frequency of data aggregation and 
analysis (check each that applies):
 State Medicaid Agency  Weekly
 Operating Agency  Monthly
 Sub-State Entity  Quarterly
 Other
Specify:
 
CCL and L&C  
 Annually
 Continuously and Ongoing
 Other
Specify:
 
 
 
ii. 
Timelines
When the State does not have all elements of the Quality Improvement Strategy in place, provide timelines to design 
methods for discovery and remediation related to the assurance of Health and Welfare that are currently non-operational.
 No
 Yes
Please provide a detailed strategy for assuring Health and Welfare, the specific timeline for implementing identified 
strategies, and the parties responsible for its operation.
 
 
 
c. 
Appendix H: Quality Improvement Strategy (1 of 3)
Under §1915(c) of the Social Security Act and 42 CFR §441.302, the approval of an HCBS waiver requires that CMS determine 
that the state has made satisfactory assurances concerning the protection of participant health and welfare, financial accountability 
and other elements of waiver operations. Renewal of an existing waiver is contingent upon review by CMS and a finding by CMS 
that the assurances have been met. By completing the HCBS waiver application, the state specifies how it has designed the 
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 114 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 115]
waiver’s critical processes, structures and operational features in order to meet these assurances.
Quality Improvement is a critical operational feature that an organization employs to continually determine whether it 
operates in accordance with the approved design of its program, meets statutory and regulatory assurances and 
requirements, achieves desired outcomes, and identifies opportunities for improvement.
■
CMS recognizes that a state’s waiver Quality Improvement Strategy may vary depending on the nature of the waiver target 
population, the services offered, and the waiver’s relationship to other public programs, and will extend beyond regulatory 
requirements. However, for the purpose of this application, the state is expected to have, at the minimum, systems in place to 
measure and improve its own performance in meeting six specific waiver assurances and requirements.
It may be more efficient and effective for a Quality Improvement Strategy to span multiple waivers and other long-term care 
services. CMS recognizes the value of this approach and will ask the state to identify other waiver programs and long-term care 
services that are addressed in the Quality Improvement Strategy.
Quality Improvement Strategy: Minimum Components
The Quality Improvement Strategy that will be in effect during the period of the approved waiver is described throughout the 
waiver in the appendices corresponding to the statutory assurances and sub-assurances. Other documents cited must be available 
to CMS upon request through the Medicaid agency or the operating agency (if appropriate).
In the QIS discovery and remediation sections throughout the application (located in Appendices A, B, C, D, G, and I) , a state 
spells out:
The evidence based discovery activities that will be conducted for each of the six major waiver assurances; and■
The remediation  activities followed to correct individual problems identified in the implementation of each of the 
assurances.
■
In Appendix H of the application, a state describes (1) the system improvement  activities followed in response to aggregated, 
analyzed discovery and remediation information collected on each of the assurances; (2) the correspondent roles/responsibilities  
of those conducting assessing and prioritizing improving system corrections and improvements; and (3) the processes the state 
will follow to continuously assess the effectiveness of the OIS  and revise it as necessary and appropriate.
If the state's Quality Improvement Strategy is not fully developed at the time the waiver application is submitted, the state may 
provide a work plan to fully develop its Quality Improvement Strategy, including the specific tasks the state plans to undertake 
during the period the waiver is in effect, the major milestones associated with these tasks, and the entity (or entities) responsible 
for the completion of these tasks.
When the Quality Improvement Strategy spans more than one waiver and/or other types of long-term care services under the 
Medicaid state plan, specify the control numbers for the other waiver programs and/or identify the other long-term services that 
are addressed in the Quality Improvement Strategy. In instances when the QIS spans more than one waiver, the state must be able 
to stratify information that is related to each approved waiver program. Unless the state has requested and received approval from 
CMS for the consolidation of multiple waivers for the purpose of reporting, then the state must stratify information that is related 
to each approved waiver program, i.e., employ a representative sample for each waiver.
Appendix H: Quality Improvement Strategy (2 of 3)
H-1: Systems Improvement
System Improvements
Describe the process(es) for trending, prioritizing, and implementing system improvements (i.e., design changes) 
prompted as a result of an analysis of discovery and remediation information.
 
i. 
a. 
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 115 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 116]
The ALW Quality Improvement Strategy (QIS) is designed to provide meaningful performance measures through 
the review of participant ISPs to identify all health care needs and develop prevention strategies through trend 
analysis, prioritization of assessed participant risks, and development of specific goals and objectives resulting in 
the implementation of system improvements. 
 
The State assures quality of participant health and welfare by setting proactive quality improvement strategies 
with participation and collaboration of the CCA in tandem with participants and/or their families, providers, 
consumer/participant advocates, and local and state agencies.  Agreed upon quality improvement goals are set on 
an annual basis with specified objectives.  The State uses reported data to set ad hoc improvement goals as the 
data and circumstances suggest. 
 
This approach is focused on the expectation that through comprehensive development of a participant’s ISP, 
(which includes all measures of the ALW Assessment Tool - assistance with ADLs, IADLs as they relate to 
coordinated physical health and community-based supports and services, as well as the seven (7) functional 
categories of cognitive patterns, behavioral symptoms, continence, communications, medications, skin conditions 
and other treatments). Each ALW participant will have a greater likelihood of improved health status and quality 
of life.  Concurrently, this process allows early identification and prevention of deterioration of the participant's 
intake health status while supporting the assurances of 42 CFR §441.301 and §441.302.   The ALW uses the 
participant’s ISP as a gauge to measure all health care needs and develop prevention strategies through qualitative 
analysis of the services delivered.  The ISP focused preventions allow the ALW participants and providers to have 
a direct role in the quality assessment and quality improvement processes allowing timely interventions to assure 
early identification of health and welfare needs. 
 
Access 
The CCA is responsible for assessment of the participant for admission into the ALW. 
The CCA is responsible for the following: 
 
• Prior to the participant’s enrollment into the ALW, complete the initial ALW Assessment and develop the initial 
ISP documenting the participant’s initial health care needs. 
 
• As stated in Appendix C-3, the ISP will include specified services to be provided with measureable outcomes for 
each service. 
 
• The ISP will be updated as needed (at a minimum of every 6 months). 
 
• The service performance measures are addressed by a regular review of the desired outcome of each health care 
need with the development of specific action plans if needed to improve or review the participant’s health care 
needs. 
 
• Each ISP review will assess the participant for health and safety needs, including any signs of abuse or neglect 
that will be immediately reported to APS, DHCS and the L&C. 
 
Trending 
• The DHCS tracks and monitors the following data sources: 
 
• ISPs and SIRs from the RCFE/ARF and the HHA 
 
• ISP updates to measure the effectiveness of updated and/or revised service plans 
 
• Complaints or concerns voiced by the participants 
 
• Concerns identified by the CCAs 
 
• The ISPs and SIRs are tracked in a log and trended by provider and type of action. 
 
 
Prioritizing 
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 116 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 117]
The ALW recognizes the following hierarchy of concerns: 
 
1.  Any ISP change, (as detailed in Appendix D) change in presenting health condition(s), altered care delivery 
goals, intervention needs, and measured outcomes to quantify compliance with waiver health and welfare 
assurances. 
 
2.  All SIRs, specifically; 
       a. Events resulting in participant injury or accident; 
       b. Events resulting in hospitalization or treatment; 
       c. Immediate threats to health and safety; 
       d. Potential threats to health and safety; 
       e. Other health care concerns that may manifest under certain conditions. 
 
 
Implementing 
 
1. The DHCS biennial QA audits provides the data for TA to all ALW provider(s). 
 
2. Identified ISP and SIR trends are closely monitored by the DHCS to support the assurances of 42 CFR 
§441.301 and §441.302. 
 
3. For all assurance problems with providers the DHCS reviews the nature and severity of the problem and, if 
needed, develops a CAP as indicated for the provider in question. 
 
4. The DHCS continues to monitor and follow up with the provider to ensure that the conditions of the CAP are 
met and the health and safety needs of the participant are met. 
 
5. If the conditions of the CAP are not addressed, then probationary action is initiated. 
 
The DHCS primary systems improvement objective for the QIS is to assure participant health and welfare through 
the following measures: 
 
1. To identify, quickly and reliably, positive or undesirable trends that will allow for necessary adjustments to 
enhance overall performance of the system, and act on opportunities for improvement; 
 
2. Assure data undergoes rigorous reliability and validity testing that is used to drive policy and procedure 
decisions to increase performance; and, 
 
3. Ensure timely discovery and remediation that allows the DHCS to take swift action to improve meaningful 
outcomes for the participants in the ALW. 
 
The QIS process is designed to review all participant reports, assessments, reassessments, special incident reports, 
critical incidents reports, etc.  The following details how the ALW performs trend analysis and prioritizes areas in 
need of remediation. 
 
The ALW Trending/Prioritizing/System Improvement Process: 
 
The QIS will determine to what extent each waiver assurance has been met during the reporting period, measure it 
against ALW goals, and assess and prioritize trends towards the goal of implementing system improvements. 
 
1. Aggregate data is collected for each performance measure.  Measures include: participant assessments; 
reassessments; ISPs and SIRs from the RCFE/ARFs and the HHAs; complaints or concerns voiced by the 
participants and concerns as identified by the CCAs. 
 
2. The ALW methodology is to coordinate the analysis of each performance measure, and track data by: 
participant, frequency, provider type, action, remediation, and systemic issues.  Additional data review includes 
identification of health care needs based on enrollment primary diagnosis and reassessed changes in participant 
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 117 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 118]
health service tier. 
 
3. The participant’s LOC is reevaluated every 6 months.  Trending of these data sources measures the provider's 
compliance with quality assurance and promotes identification of needed remedial or corrective actions.  A 
combination of audit tools is used to support analysis of the performance measures. 
 
4. CAPs are prioritized based on risk assessment and health and welfare needs of participants.  Interventions 
include a continuum of actions from staff training to removal of provider from the ALW.  All CAPs are monitored 
for efficacy of remedial action.  The remedy/improvement may be more appropriately targeted to specific 
situations. 
 
The DHCS primary systems improvement objective for the QIS is to assure participant health and welfare through 
the following measures: 
 
• Identify, quickly and reliably, positive and adverse trends that will allow for necessary adjustments to enhance 
overall performance of the system, and act on opportunities for improvement; 
 
• Assure data that is used to drive policy and procedure decisions undergoes rigorous reliability and validity 
testing to increase performance; and 
 
• Ensure timely discovery and remediation that allows the DHCS to take swift action to improve meaningful 
outcomes for the participants in the ALW. 
 
• Performance Measure Indicator: – All SIRs are followed up within 24 hours by the State and specific licensing 
agencies as provided in state regulations. Identified ISP and SIR trends are closely monitored by the DHCS to 
support the assurances of 42 CFR §441.301 and §441.302.  
System Improvement Activities
Responsible Party (check each that applies): Frequency of Monitoring and Analysis (check each 
that applies):
 State Medicaid Agency  Weekly
 Operating Agency  Monthly
 Sub-State Entity  Quarterly
 Quality Improvement Committee  Annually
 Other
Specify:
 
CCAs, RCFE/ARFs and HHAs  
 Other
Specify:
 
On-going and continuous  
ii. 
System Design Changes
Describe the process for monitoring and analyzing the effectiveness of system design changes. Include a 
description of the various roles and responsibilities involved in the processes for monitoring & assessing system 
design changes. If applicable, include the state's targeted standards for systems improvement.
 
i. 
b. 
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 118 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 119]
The Medicaid agency retains the ultimate authority for the assurance of quality and quality improvement in the 
ALW. 
 
The QIS uses a multi-level approach.  Each level is designed to promote discovery, identify trends and capture 
timely remediation information that promote system improvements. 
 
Level One:  Level of Care Evaluation/Reevaluation 
 
• LOC determination as detailed in Appendix B-6 is generated by the CCA prior to initial enrollment and 
reviewed by the DHCS 
 
• Each waiver participant is reassessed for LOC at least every six months or upon significant change by the CCA. 
All reassessments are reviewed by the DHCS. 
 
• The ISP, jointly developed by the participant and the CCA, is used to guide all plan services and safeguards as 
detailed in the waiver guidance. 
 
 
Level Two:  Service Plan 
• As detailed in Appendix C, the CCA reviews the ISPs monthly with the participant to assure that the 
participant’s needs are addressed and considered. 
 
• The ISPs are developed in accordance to the waiver requirements to identify all health care needs and address 
health and safety risks of participants, with monthly review by the CCAs and annual review by the DHCS. 
 
• The ISPs are revised as needed and at least every six months by the CCAs and reviewed by the DHCS. 
 
• Services outlined by the ISP are implemented by staff of the RCFE/ARFs and HHA, and reviewed monthly by 
the CCA and annually by the DHCS. 
 
• Providers are held accountable for the health and safety of the participants.  ISPs are reviewed for completeness 
and the appropriateness of the interventions for addressing the healthcare needs of the participant as identified in 
the assessment. 
 
 
Level Three:  Coordination of the Qualified Providers 
• CDSS CCL is responsible for ensuring RCFE/ARFs meet licensing and certification requirements of the CDSS. 
 
• CDPH L&C is responsible for ensuring that HHAs meet the licensing and certification requirements of the 
CDPH. 
 
• DHCS is responsible for annual monitoring to assure provider adherence to waiver requirements, and follow up 
when providers have not met specified standards. 
 
• DHCS is responsible for annually compiling and reviewing data collected from waiver providers and waiver 
participants for quality assurance. 
 
• Providers are responsible for the health and safety of the participants. 
The CCAs monitor the RCFE/ARFs and HHAs and the DHCS monitors the CCAs (as well as the RCFE/ARFs 
and the HHAs). 
 
 
Level Four:  Prevention of instances of abuse, neglect and exploitation 
• Through the ALW Provider Manual and annual training, the State provides TA to the CCAs and all providers on 
the identification of abuse, neglect and exploitation, timelines for the notification of specified authorities, and 
remediation information. 
 
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 119 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 120]
• The State reviews all SIRs, with linkages to the State Licensing Agencies. 
 
• The State analyzes a statistically significant percentage of SIRs for trends to allow development of risk 
prevention strategies.  Data is reviewed continuously and analyzed annually by the DHCS. 
 
• Systemic issues are addressed through CAPs and TA by the DHCS.  The DHCS continues to monitor the 
providers after the deliverance of the TA to assure that the practices are changed according to the CAP and that 
the issues are remediated. 
 
In the event that the systemic issues persist, the DHCS will revisit the provider, offer additional TA and impose 
sanctions as indicated and as described in H.1.a.i.  TA is offered to the providers on a global basis for program-
wide systemic issues and on an individual basis for issues pertaining to a particular provider. 
 
 
Level Five:  Administrative Authority provided by the DHCS 
• DHCS is the administrative authority for the ALW that monitor actions of other State agencies and of all 
providers. 
 
• The annual review of provider records and of participant records followed by monitoring and analysis produces 
the recommended changes brought to the QMS for discussion and action. 
 
• The Olmstead Advisory Group and the ALW Stakeholders’ Group provide input to the ALW quality 
management system.  These advisory groups are comprised of primary customers and family members, providers, 
and advocacy organizations that meet quarterly.  
Describe the process to periodically evaluate, as appropriate, the Quality Improvement Strategy.
 
The Medicaid agency retains the ultimate responsibility for the assurance of quality improvement through the 
implementation of the QIS.  The process for periodic evaluation of the QIS is embedded in the biennial QA audit. 
The audits are based on the performance measures and are held to the standard of the confidence interval. 
 
The QIS has a process that separates the programs measures into, 
1)  required actions taken, indicating that the provider has followed protocols and all corrective measures have 
been resolved, and 
 
2)  corrective actions taken by provider and reported to the QIS prior to audits and/or review of trend analysis. 
 
Individual provider problems are based on review of State regulations and policies governing actions specified in 
licensing guidelines.  As required by corrective action findings individual providers will complete specified staff 
trainings to update staff competencies based on ALW participant's needs. 
 
The QIS documents all oversight activities through program letters, coordination of provider continued eligibility 
as a Medi-Cal contracted provider of ALW services, noted in all provider records, maintained in a running record 
in the providers files, and update reports to CMS as required.  
ii. 
Appendix H: Quality Improvement Strategy (3 of 3)
H-2: Use of a Patient Experience of Care/Quality of Life Survey
Specify whether the state has deployed a patient experience of care or quality of life survey for its HCBS population 
in the last 12 months (Select one):
 No
 Yes  (Complete item H.2b)
a. 
Specify the type of survey tool the state uses:b. 
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 120 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 121]
HCBS CAHPS Survey  :
 NCI Survey  :
 NCI AD Survey  :
 Other  (Please provide a description of the survey tool used):
 
 
 
Appendix I: Financial Accountability
I-1: Financial Integrity and Accountability
Financial Integrity. Describe the methods that are employed to ensure the integrity of payments that have been made for 
waiver services, including: (a) requirements concerning the independent audit of provider agencies; (b) the financial audit 
program that the state conducts to ensure the integrity of provider billings for Medicaid payment of waiver services, 
including the methods, scope and frequency of audits; and, (c) the agency (or agencies) responsible for conducting the 
financial audit program. State laws, regulations, and policies referenced in the description are available to CMS upon 
request through the Medicaid agency or the operating agency (if applicable).
 
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 121 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 122]
The Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) Compliant HCPCS Codes are unique to each waiver 
service.  Each provider type is only eligible to bill for the wavier service(s)they render.  The billing is via a standardized 
billing form,the UB-04.  Claims are submitted to the fiscal intermediary for payment.  Only recognized Medi-Cal billers 
may be paid for waiver services. Waiver service providers are not required to secure an independent financial statement 
audit. 
 
 
A listing of ALW service rates are available at http://www.dhcs.ca.gov/services/ltc/Pages/AssistedLivingWaiver.aspx 
 
Audits are conducted at three levels: 
 
1) The DHCS examines the provider records and contrasts and compares the records with the authorized services; 
 
2) The Audits and Investigations Division (A&I) is available to conduct a more detailed financial analysis in the event of 
suspicious billing practices; and 
 
3) The state conducts routine, random audits of all Medi-Cal billers to ensure competency and accuracy in the paid claims. 
These audits occur on an ongoing basis throughout the year. 
 
A&I is responsible for ensuring the fiscal integrity and medical necessity of Medi-Cal program services. A&I conducts 
audits on an ongoing basis throughout the year. All claims submitted by waiver and state plan providers are subject to 
random review regardless of provider type, specialty, or service rendered.  A&I verifies that claims selected have sufficient 
documentation to approve the claim for payment.  Providers are notified if a claim requires additional documentation 
before approval for payment.  Failure to comply with the request for additional documentation may result in suspension 
from the Medi-Cal program, pursuant to W&I §14124.2.  A&I has three branches that conduct reviews using various 
methodologies to ensure program integrity and the validity of claims for reimbursement. 
 
A&I utilizes both desk reviews and on-site review processes when reviewing claims data.  A&I conducts larger scale claims 
reviews through a desk review process to identify billing trends to flag for additional investigation.  A&I will then do follow 
up focused desk review on specific providers and if claims discrepancies are identified can lead to onsite audit to compare 
billed/paid claims against services authorized and documented in the waiver participants’ plan of care.  A&I uses random 
sampling of claims for audit processes across all three levels of auditing described in the waiver application.  A&I will run 
desk review queries that randomly sample claims submitted by specific provider types over specific time periods.  Claims 
sample periods can vary based upon the objective of the audit but typically are set at intervals of six months or by fiscal 
years.  The random sampling is dependent on the type of query run (ie. prov type, provider specific, billing code specific). 
A&I identifies a statistically significant sample size based upon the query and then generates a sufficient random sample for 
review. 
 
ISCD monitors billing on a quarterly basis as well as focused queries prior to onsite visits in order to identify any potential 
billing issues.  If issues are identified, ISCD will work with the fiscal intermediary and A&I to arrange ad hoc desk and 
onsite reviews to further investigate potential findings/inappropriate billing practices and recoup payment if determined 
necessary. 
 
The A&I Medical Review Branch (MRB) performs essential medical reviews of non-institutional providers.  Providers may 
also be subject to a more comprehensive review on a weekly basis known as a pre-checkwrite review.  This review is based 
on a set of criteria, such as irregular billing patterns, designed to identify potential fraud or abuse.  Providers selected for 
this more comprehensive review may receive an on-site visit by A&I staff.  Many of these reviews result in program 
removal, monetary penalties, or less intrusive sanctions and utilization controls. 
 
The MRB also conducts Medi-Cal provider anti-fraud activities that include performing field reviews on new Medi-Cal 
providers and providers undergoing re-enrollment.  MRB is charged with bringing closure to sanctioned providers through 
audits designed to quantify the abuse, settlement agreement, or permissive suspensions (exclusions) from the Medi-Cal 
program.  Failure to comply with any request by A&I staff for documentation may result in administrative sanctions, 
including suspension from the Medi-Cal program, pursuant to W&I §14124.2. 
 
MRB staff work closely with the fiscal intermediary in data mining and extracting processes as well as the performance of 
the annual Medi-Cal Payment Error Study. 
 
The A&I Financial Audits Branch performs cost settlement and rate setting audits of institutional providers, i.e. hospitals, 
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 122 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 123]
nursing facilities, and certain clinics. 
 
The A&I Investigations Branch (IB) conducts investigations of suspected Medi-Cal beneficiary fraud as well as preliminary 
investigations of provider fraud.  IB is also responsible for coordinating provider fraud referrals to the state Department of 
Justice (DOJ) and Federal Bureau of Investigations.  Suspected fraud or abuse identified through any audit or investigation 
process is referred to the DOJ via the IB. IB and MRB coordinate the placing of administrative sanctions on providers with 
substantiated evidence of fraud.  IB serves as DHCS' principal liaison with outside law enforcement and prosecutorial 
entities on Medi-Cal fraud. 
 
The Department of Finance (Finance), consistent with its responsibility for serving as the Governor's chief fiscal policy 
advisor, is responsible for federal audit coordination. Finance assigns the Office of State Audits and Evaluations (OSAE) to 
perform the necessary steps to carry out the State's responsibilities  
Appendix I: Financial Accountability
Quality Improvement: Financial Accountability
As a distinct component of the States quality improvement strategy, provide information in the following fields to detail the States 
methods for discovery and remediation.
Methods for Discovery: Financial Accountability Assurance:
The State must demonstrate that it has designed and implemented an adequate system for ensuring financial 
accountability of the waiver program.  (For waiver actions submitted before June 1, 2014, this assurance read "State 
financial oversight exists to assure that claims are coded and paid for in accordance with the reimbursement methodology 
specified in the approved waiver.")
Sub-Assurances:
Sub-assurance: The State provides evidence that claims are coded and paid for in accordance with the 
reimbursement methodology specified in the approved waiver and only for services rendered.  
(Performance measures in this sub-assurance include all Appendix I performance measures for waiver 
actions submitted before June 1, 2014.)
Performance Measures
For each performance measure the State will use to assess compliance with the statutory assurance (or 
sub-assurance), complete the following. Where possible, include numerator/denominator.
For each performance measure, provide information on the aggregated data that will enable the State to 
analyze and assess progress toward the performance measure. In this section provide information on the 
method by which each source of data is analyzed statistically/deductively or inductively, how themes are 
identified or conclusions drawn, and how recommendations are formulated, where appropriate.
Performance Measure:
Financial Accountability-Number and percent of participants who were enrolled on the 
waiver prior to submission of claims. Numerator: = number of participants who were 
enrolled on the waiver prior to submission of claims Denominator: = total number of 
waiver participants
Data Source  (Select one):
Other
If 'Other' is selected, specify:
1. DHCS Audits-provider records, contracts of authorized services 2. A&I conducts 
detailed financial analysis on all suspicious billing 3. State Medicaid Agency conducts 
random audits
Responsible Party for 
data collection/generation
Frequency of data 
collection/generation
Sampling Approach (check 
each that applies):
a. 
i. 
a. 
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 123 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 124]
(check each that applies): (check each that applies):
 State Medicaid 
Agency
 Weekly  100% Review
 Operating Agency  Monthly  Less than 100% 
Review
 Sub-State Entity  Quarterly  Representative 
Sample
Confidence 
Interval =
 
 
 
 Other
Specify:
 
 
 
 Annually  Stratified
Describe Group:
 
 
 
 Continuously and 
Ongoing
 Other
Specify:
 
As determined 
necessary  
 Other
Specify:
 
 
 
Data Aggregation and Analysis:
Responsible Party for data aggregation 
and analysis (check each that applies):
Frequency of data aggregation and 
analysis (check each that applies):
 State Medicaid Agency  Weekly
 Operating Agency  Monthly
 Sub-State Entity  Quarterly
 Other
Specify:
 
A&I 
DHCS  
 Annually
 Continuously and Ongoing
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 124 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 125]
Responsible Party for data aggregation 
and analysis (check each that applies):
Frequency of data aggregation and 
analysis (check each that applies):
 Other
Specify:
 
 
 
Sub-assurance: The state provides evidence that rates remain consistent with the approved rate 
methodology throughout the five year waiver cycle.
Performance Measures
For each performance measure the State will use to assess compliance with the statutory assurance (or 
sub-assurance), complete the following. Where possible, include numerator/denominator.
For each performance measure, provide information on the aggregated data that will enable the State to 
analyze and assess progress toward the performance measure. In this section provide information on the 
method by which each source of data is analyzed statistically/deductively or inductively, how themes are 
identified or conclusions drawn, and how recommendations are formulated, where appropriate.
Performance Measure:
Financial Accountability - Number/percent of claims coded and paid for in accordance 
with the reimbursement methodology. Numerator: number of claims coded and paid in 
accordance with the approved rate. Denominator: number of claims reviewed.
Data Source  (Select one):
Other
If 'Other' is selected, specify:
1. DHCS Audits-provider records, contracts of authorized services 2. A&I conducts 
detailed financial analysis on all suspicious billing 3. State Medicaid Agency conducts 
random audits
Responsible Party for 
data collection/generation
(check each that applies):
Frequency of data 
collection/generation
(check each that applies):
Sampling Approach (check 
each that applies):
 State Medicaid 
Agency
 Weekly  100% Review
 Operating Agency  Monthly  Less than 100% 
Review
 Sub-State Entity  Quarterly  Representative 
Sample
Confidence 
Interval =
 
 
 
 Other  Stratified Annually
b. 
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 125 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 126]
Specify:
 
 
 
Describe Group:
 
 
 
 Continuously and 
Ongoing
 Other
Specify:
 
As determined 
necessary  
 Other
Specify:
 
 
 
Data Aggregation and Analysis:
Responsible Party for data aggregation 
and analysis (check each that applies):
Frequency of data aggregation and 
analysis (check each that applies):
 State Medicaid Agency  Weekly
 Operating Agency  Monthly
 Sub-State Entity  Quarterly
 Other
Specify:
 
A&I 
DHCS  
 Annually
 Continuously and Ongoing
 Other
Specify:
 
 
 
If applicable, in the textbox below provide any necessary additional information on the strategies employed by the 
State to discover/identify problems/issues within the waiver program, including frequency and parties responsible.
 
Discovery: 
An on-site qualification review will be conducted for all waiver providers to ensure provider qualification 
compliance. 
 
The DHCS will annually review a random sample of paid claims data to assure that claims are coded and paid 
for in accordance with the reimbursement methodology specified in Appendix I-3 of the approved waiver.  
ii. 
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 126 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 127]
Methods for Remediation/Fixing Individual Problems
Describe the States method for addressing individual problems as they are discovered. Include information 
regarding responsible parties and GENERAL methods for problem correction. In addition, provide information on 
the methods used by the state to document these items.
 
A representative sample size of paid claims data will be generated, based on the enrolled population, to ensure 
that claims are coded and paid for in accordance with the reimbursement methodology. In the event that a 
discrepancy is discovered, the provider would be given a plan for remediation, a timeframe in which to implement 
the changes in their billing practices as described in the plan to achieve the indicated improvement and then 
perfect design changes to ensure continuance of enhanced practice.  
i. 
Remediation Data Aggregation
Remediation-related Data Aggregation and Analysis (including trend identification)
Responsible Party (check each that applies): Frequency of data aggregation and analysis
(check each that applies):
 State Medicaid Agency  Weekly
 Operating Agency  Monthly
 Sub-State Entity  Quarterly
 Other
Specify:
 
 
 
 Annually
 Continuously and Ongoing
 Other
Specify:
 
 
 
ii. 
b. 
Timelines
When the State does not have all elements of the Quality Improvement Strategy in place, provide timelines to design 
methods for discovery and remediation related to the assurance of Financial Accountability that are currently non-
operational.
 No
 Yes
Please provide a detailed strategy for assuring Financial Accountability, the specific timeline for implementing 
identified strategies, and the parties responsible for its operation.
 
 
 
c. 
Appendix I: Financial Accountability
I-2: Rates, Billing and Claims (1 of 3)
Rate Determination Methods. In two pages or less, describe the methods that are employed to establish provider payment 
rates for waiver services and the entity or entities that are responsible for rate determination. Indicate any opportunity for 
public comment in the process. If different methods are employed for various types of services, the description may group 
services for which the same method is employed. State laws, regulations, and policies referenced in the description are 
available upon request to CMS through the Medicaid agency or the operating agency (if applicable).
a. 
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 127 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 128]
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 128 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 129]
DHCS solicits  comments from the public when a new rate methodology is being implemented or new rates are being 
developed.  In most cases when adjusting Waiver rate methodologies, the rate methodology is presented through the 
standard public input process.  The State publishes the Amendment/Renewal online for public review and input along 
with an electronic news blast to interested parties, and publishes a notice in the California Register to inform the public, 
through non-electronic means, that the rate methodology is changing and where the public can find a copy.  In other 
cases, Waiver rates are tied to Medi-Cal State Plan rates, which are handled through the official DHCS SPA public 
noticing process.  For example, updates to rates as a result of minimum wage increases.  Lastly, DHCS informs 
stakeholders of the ALW through direct correspondence, website updates, and through bi-monthly stakeholder calls 
hosted by DHCS. 
 
DHCS released the design and reimbursement structure of the ALW in a series of public stakeholder meetings in the 
summer of 2005.  The original four tiers of service and the Care Coordination service remain cost neutral with the 
assumption that ALW participant use of state plan services does not generally exceed the predicted annual average for 
Factor D'. 
 
 
The state used the hourly Medi-Cal rate for Homemaker, Home Health Aide, and Personal care to establish the Tier 1 
baseline daily rate.  The daily Tier 1 rate assumes roughly one hour spent providing those three services throughout the 
day.  Additionally, the state factored an additional ~20% for fringe benefits paid to the facilities to account for standard 
employer costs for direct care workers. 
 
The state assumes a 20% increase in service duration/engagement per client as each acuity level increases. The daily 
bundled rate for the ALW was developed through stakeholder input and comparable services for similar populations. 
Utilizing the ALW assessment tool to determine acuity level of participants, as well as comparing needs of those similar 
populations, acuity levels of participants are reasonably accurate in determining the number of hours of service needed 
per client.  In other words, Tier 1 participants generally need roughly one hour per component provided intermittently 
throughout the day.  As acuity levels rise, the state determined that the number of hours per component needed per client 
rose approximately 20%.  The exception to these assumptions is in tier 5, which is reserved for the highest acuity 
participants with Traumatic Brain Injury (TBI).  Stakeholders played a key role in determining the daily rate for this level 
of service.  The Department and stakeholders agreed that the Tier 5 rate would be sufficient to fund qualified staff for 
these participants whose needs are significantly more intensive than the other acuity levels. 
 
 
The new reimbursement structure, which includes the addition of Tier five was publicly presented through a stakeholder 
meeting held August 29, 2013 and reflects the severity of the physical, mental and cognitive condition of an individual 
with traumatic brain injury as an ALW participant.  The increase rate for Assisted Living Services and the addition of 
Residential Habilitation and Augmented Plan of Care Development and Follow-Up will ensure appropriate care and 
supervision of all ALW participants. 
 
The increased reimbursement rate for Tier five, Assisted Living Services is based upon the statewide weighted average 
NF-B rate.The statewide weighted average NF-B rate is divided into seven regions or “peer groups,” all having a 
different daily weighted average rate.  For ALW, DHCS averaged the rate in the most densely populated region (Los 
Angeles at $204.31/day) and the least densely populated region (includes Kern and Tulare at $193/day).  The average 
daily rate of the two regions resulted in $199, rounded to $200 for the ALW. 
 
The State arrived at the rate of $1,600 for NF Transition by estimating the amount of work necessary to transition an 
individual from a SNF into the waiver, within the limitations of cost effectiveness standards and yet still offering a 
financial incentive to Care Coordinators to actively pursue the NF transition. The figure of $1,600 is derived from the 
estimation that NF transition is the equivalent of five months of Care Coordination. Care Coordination is estimated to 
cost $320/month. 
 
The rate for Augmented Plan of Care Development and Follow-Up is based upon the assumption that many participants 
will require approximately 11 hours per month of this type of service that would be reimbursed at the Medi-Cal home and 
community-based services waiver, home health agency case management rate of $11.36 per 15 minutes. 
 
Residential Habilitation is a service designed to provide greater attention to ALW participants with violent or self-
destructive behaviors.  It provides specialized behavior modification techniques related to issues such as Traumatic 
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 129 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 130]
Brain Injury (TBI).  The service pays for additional, appropriate staff to focus individual attention on one participant to 
assist in acquiring, retaining and improving the self-help, socialization and adaptive skills while concentrating on 
helping them to control their behavior issues that would otherwise preclude them from living in a community setting. 
Staff may be licensed medical staff, personal or nursing aides, security personnel, or other specialties as appropriate to 
the specific participant. The state considered the service definitions, provider qualifications and unit rates of similar 
HCBA and MSSP services when determining Residential Habilitation rates. DHCS used the average cost per user for this 
statutory service for the HCBS Waiver for Californians with Developmental Disabilities as the baseline, with an 
additional $0.25 per 15 minute increment to account for the potentially higher acuity participants of ALW who have TBI. 
The rate was developed with stakeholder input. 
 
Care Coordination rate is based on case management rates paid for other HCBS Waivers, but is paid at a higher rate to 
account for the greater responsibility of ALW Care Coordinators.  For example, ALW Care Coordinators are required to 
reassess each participant every six months, and more frequently if the participants’ condition changes.  Additionally, 
Care Coordinators are required to conduct face to face meetings with participants on a monthly basis.  These 
requirements are more stringent than other HCBS Waivers, including MSSP which requires quarterly face-to-face visits 
and annual reassessments.  Conversely, the ALW Care Coordination is less stringent than what is required in the AIDS 
Waiver, which requires a social worker and an RN case manager.  DHCS used MSSP and AIDS Waivers as the baseline 
for determining the Care Coordination Rate. Staffing / provider qualifications, assessment/reassessment requirements, 
frequency of beneficiary contact, and other challenges specific to the Wavers’ populations served all factored in to the 
development of the ALW Care Coordination rate.  The Care Coordination rate also takes into account the annual 
increases in minimum wage, as there are clerical staff employed by the Care Coordination Agency.  The Care 
Coordination rate paid to the CCAs ensures adequate payment for the specialized staff (RN with specific experience 
requirements, and Social Workers) as well as the clerical staff and other fixed costs of the CCA. The rate was developed 
with stakeholder input. 
 
 
Tier five will continue to provide cost neutrality in the aggregate with the assumption that the use of State Plan services 
will not generally exceed the predicted annual average of $5,500. 
 
All waiver participants will continue to receive the services they are entitled to through the waiver and the State Plan. 
This waiver will not violate the Medicaid comparability requirement that services must be comparable, and are based on 
medical necessity, not enrollment in another Medicaid program. 
 
The Integrated Systems of Care Division holds direct responsibility for determining rates and for oversight of the rate 
determination process. 
 
A list of all reimbursement rates are posted on the ALW website at: 
http://www.dhcs.ca.gov/services/ltc/Pages/AssistedLivingWaiver.aspx and is reviewed at stakeholder meetings prior to 
implementation. 
 
The State will release stakeholder  notifications to inform providers/stakeholders of upcoming rate changes and the 
schedule for implementation.  Service rates are posted on the ALW web page and updated upon change. The State also 
informs providers and stakeholders of any upcoming changes to service rates during bi-monthly stakeholder calls. 
 
ISCD runs billing queries for a random audit sample prior to onsite visits.  Results may trigger follow up questions and 
requests for additional documentation to confirm billing practices.  These audits are performed monthly, but they are 
limited to the amount of cases audited by staff during site visits.  ISCD also runs quarterly queries to fulfill waiver 
reporting requirements, and uses obtained data to also review for inappropriate billing incidents.  This process will 
trigger ad hoc onsite visits if/when billing discrepancies are identified.  
Flow of Billings.  Describe the flow of billings for waiver services, specifying whether provider billings flow directly from 
providers to the state's claims payment system or whether billings are routed through other intermediary entities. If 
billings flow through other intermediary entities, specify the entities:
 
The waiver service providers bill Medi-Cal directly using the UB-04 standardized billing form.  
b. 
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 130 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 131]
Appendix I: Financial Accountability
I-2: Rates, Billing and Claims (2 of 3)
Certifying Public Expenditures  (select one) :
 No. state or local government agencies do not certify expenditures for waiver services.
 Yes. state or local government agencies directly expend funds for part or all of the cost of waiver services 
and certify their state government expenditures (CPE) in lieu of billing that amount to Medicaid.
Select at least one :
 Certified Public Expenditures (CPE) of State Public Agencies.
Specify: (a) the state government agency or agencies that certify public expenditures for waiver services; (b) 
how it is assured that the CPE is based on the total computable costs for waiver services; and, (c) how the state 
verifies that the certified public expenditures are eligible for Federal financial participation in accordance with 
42 CFR §433.51(b). (Indicate source of revenue for CPEs in Item I-4-a.)
 
 
 
 Certified Public Expenditures (CPE) of Local Government Agencies.
Specify: (a) the local government agencies that incur certified public expenditures for waiver services; (b) how it 
is assured that the CPE is based on total computable costs for waiver services; and, (c) how the state verifies 
that the certified public expenditures are eligible for Federal financial participation in accordance with 42 CFR 
§433.51(b). (Indicate source of revenue for CPEs in Item I-4-b.)
 
 
 
c. 
Appendix I: Financial Accountability
I-2: Rates, Billing and Claims (3 of 3)
Billing Validation Process.  Describe the process for validating provider billings to produce the claim for federal financial 
participation, including the mechanism(s) to assure that all claims for payment are made only: (a) when the individual 
was eligible for Medicaid waiver payment on the date of service; (b) when the service was included in the participant's 
approved service plan; and, (c) the services were provided:
 
d. 
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 131 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 132]
All ALW participants have full-scope Medi-Cal eligibility with no share of cost. 
 
The CCA confirms eligibility at the time a participant is enrolled by obtaining a Medi-Cal eligibility printout.  The CCA 
continues to verify Medi-Cal eligibility monthly. 
 
The CCA completes the Assessment Tool and verifies the NF LOC status of a potential participant.  To enroll a 
participant into the ALW, the CCA forwards the enrollment forms for processing to the DHCS. 
 
Claims submitted for each participant are processed through the California Medi-Cal Management Information System 
to check for Medi-Cal eligibility prior to payment. 
 
DHCS will regularly review a random sample of paid claims to assure that claims are coded and paid for in accordance 
with services included in the participant’s service plan and verified by monthly visits conducted by the CCA. 
 
ISCD runs billing queries for a random audit sample prior to onsite visits.  Results may trigger follow up questions and 
requests for additional documentation to confirm billing practices.  These audits are performed monthly, but they are 
limited to the amount of cases audited by staff during site visits.  ISCD also runs quarterly queries to fulfill waiver 
reporting requirements, and uses obtained data to also review for inappropriate billing incidents.  This process will 
trigger ad hoc onsite visits if/when billing discrepancies are identified. 
 
ISCD works with the DHCS Audits and Investigation (A&I) team and DHCS’ fiscal intermediary to recoup federal funds 
from the provider. ISCD monitors billing on a quarterly basis as well as focused queries prior to onsite visits in order to 
identify any potential billing issues.  If issues are identified, ISCD will work with the Fiscal Intermediary and A&I for ad 
hoc reviews to further investigate any inappropriate billing and recoup payment if determined necessary. ISCD will 
coordinate with Accounting to process return of federal match claimed through inappropriate billings. 
The steps to recoup funds will be as follows: 
o 	 Determine at the RCFE/CCA facility to see if the beneficiary is still enrolled 
o 	 Notify DHCS supervisor of the potential billing issue 
o 	 DHCS supervisor will notify our Fiscal Intermediary and the Data Unit. 
o 	 Fiscal Intermediary will notify A&I to recoup funds. 
o 	 Correspondence will be mailed to the provider with the amount owed and the due date. 
o 	 Accounting notified of inappropriate billing and instructed to return federal match for any recoupments processed.  
Billing and Claims Record Maintenance Requirement.  Records documenting the audit trail of adjudicated claims 
(including supporting documentation) are maintained by the Medicaid agency, the operating agency (if applicable), and 
providers of waiver services for a minimum period of 3 years as required in 45 CFR §92.42.
e. 
Appendix I: Financial Accountability
I-3: Payment (1 of 7)
Method of payments -- MMIS  ( select one ):
 Payments for all waiver services are made through an approved Medicaid Management Information System 
(MMIS).
 Payments for some, but not all, waiver services are made through an approved MMIS.
Specify: (a) the waiver services that are not paid through an approved MMIS; (b) the process for making such 
payments and the entity that processes payments; (c) and how an audit trail is maintained for all state and federal 
funds expended outside the MMIS; and, (d) the basis for the draw of federal funds and claiming of these expenditures 
on the CMS-64:
 
 
 
 Payments for waiver services are not made through an approved MMIS.
a. 
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 132 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 133]
Specify: (a) the process by which payments are made and the entity that processes payments; (b) how and through 
which system(s) the payments are processed; (c) how an audit trail is maintained for all state and federal funds 
expended outside the MMIS; and, (d) the basis for the draw of federal funds and claiming of these expenditures on 
the CMS-64:
 
 
 
 Payments for waiver services are made by a managed care entity or entities. The managed care entity is paid a 
monthly capitated payment per eligible enrollee through an approved MMIS.
Describe how payments are made to the managed care entity or entities:
 
 
 
Appendix I: Financial Accountability
I-3: Payment (2 of 7)
Direct payment.  In addition to providing that the Medicaid agency makes payments directly to providers of waiver 
services, payments for waiver services are made utilizing one or more of the following arrangements ( select at least one ):
 The Medicaid agency makes payments directly and does not use a fiscal agent (comprehensive or limited) or a 
managed care entity or entities.
 The Medicaid agency pays providers through the same fiscal agent used for the rest of the Medicaid program.
 The Medicaid agency pays providers of some or all waiver services through the use of a limited fiscal agent.
Specify the limited fiscal agent, the waiver services for which the limited fiscal agent makes payment, the functions 
that the limited fiscal agent performs in paying waiver claims, and the methods by which the Medicaid agency 
oversees the operations of the limited fiscal agent:
 
 
 
 Providers are paid by a managed care entity or entities for services that are included in the state's contract with the 
entity.
Specify how providers are paid for the services (if any) not included in the state's contract with managed care 
entities.
 
 
 
b. 
Appendix I: Financial Accountability
I-3: Payment (3 of 7)
Supplemental or Enhanced Payments.  Section 1902(a)(30) requires that payments for services be consistent with 
efficiency, economy, and quality of care. Section 1903(a)(1) provides for Federal financial participation to states for 
expenditures for services under an approved state plan/waiver. Specify whether supplemental or enhanced payments are 
made. Select one:
c. 
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 133 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 134]
No. The state does not make supplemental or enhanced payments for waiver services.
 Yes. The state makes supplemental or enhanced payments for waiver services.
Describe: (a) the nature of the supplemental or enhanced payments that are made and the waiver services for which 
these payments are made; (b) the types of providers to which such payments are made; (c) the source of the non-
Federal share of the supplemental or enhanced payment; and, (d) whether providers eligible to receive the 
supplemental or enhanced payment retain 100% of the total computable expenditure claimed by the state to CMS. 
Upon request, the state will furnish CMS with detailed information about the total amount of supplemental or 
enhanced payments to each provider type in the waiver.
 
 
 
Appendix I: Financial Accountability
I-3: Payment (4 of 7)
Payments to state or Local Government Providers.  Specify whether state or local government providers receive payment 
for the provision of waiver services.
 No. State or local government providers do not receive payment for waiver services.  Do not complete Item I-3-e.
 Yes. State or local government providers receive payment for waiver services.  Complete Item I-3-e.
Specify the types of state or local government providers that receive payment for waiver services and the services that 
the state or local government providers furnish:
 
 
 
d. 
Appendix I: Financial Accountability
I-3: Payment (5 of 7)
Amount of Payment to State or Local Government Providers.
Specify whether any state or local government provider receives payments (including regular and any supplemental 
payments) that in the aggregate exceed its reasonable costs of providing waiver services and, if so, whether and how the 
state recoups the excess and returns the Federal share of the excess to CMS on the quarterly expenditure report. Select 
one:
Answers provided in Appendix I-3-d indicate that you do not need to complete this section.
 The amount paid to state or local government providers is the same as the amount paid to private providers 
of the same service.
 The amount paid to state or local government providers differs from the amount paid to private providers of 
the same service. No public provider receives payments that in the aggregate exceed its reasonable costs of 
providing waiver services.
 The amount paid to state or local government providers differs from the amount paid to private providers of 
the same service. When a state or local government provider receives payments (including regular and any 
supplemental payments) that in the aggregate exceed the cost of waiver services, the state recoups the excess 
and returns the federal share of the excess to CMS on the quarterly expenditure report.
Describe the recoupment process:
e. 
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 134 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 135]
Appendix I: Financial Accountability
I-3: Payment (6 of 7)
Provider Retention of Payments.  Section 1903(a)(1) provides that Federal matching funds are only available for 
expenditures made by states for services under the approved waiver. Select one:
 Providers receive and retain 100 percent of the amount claimed to CMS for waiver services.
 Providers are paid by a managed care entity (or entities) that is paid a monthly capitated payment.
Specify whether the monthly capitated payment to managed care entities is reduced or returned in part to the state.
 
 
 
f. 
Appendix I: Financial Accountability
I-3: Payment (7 of 7)
Additional Payment Arrangements
Voluntary Reassignment of Payments to a Governmental Agency.  Select one:
 No. The state does not provide that providers may voluntarily reassign their right to direct payments 
to a governmental agency.
 Yes. Providers may voluntarily reassign their right to direct payments to a governmental agency as 
provided in 42 CFR §447.10(e).
Specify the governmental agency (or agencies) to which reassignment may be made.
 
 
 
i. 
Organized Health Care Delivery System.  Select one:
 No. The state does not employ Organized Health Care Delivery System (OHCDS) arrangements 
under the provisions of 42 CFR §447.10.
 Yes. The waiver provides for the use of Organized Health Care Delivery System arrangements under 
the provisions of 42 CFR §447.10.
Specify the following: (a) the entities that are designated as an OHCDS and how these entities qualify for 
designation as an OHCDS; (b) the procedures for direct provider enrollment when a provider does not 
voluntarily agree to contract with a designated OHCDS; (c) the method(s) for assuring that participants have 
free choice of qualified providers when an OHCDS arrangement is employed, including the selection of 
providers not affiliated with the OHCDS; (d) the method(s) for assuring that providers that furnish services 
under contract with an OHCDS meet applicable provider qualifications under the waiver; (e) how it is 
assured that OHCDS contracts with providers meet applicable requirements; and, (f) how financial 
accountability is assured when an OHCDS arrangement is used:
ii. 
g. 
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 135 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 136]
Contracts with MCOs, PIHPs or PAHPs.
 The state does not contract with MCOs, PIHPs or PAHPs for the provision of waiver services.
 The state contracts with a Managed Care Organization(s) (MCOs) and/or prepaid inpatient health plan(s) 
(PIHP) or prepaid ambulatory health plan(s) (PAHP) under the provisions of §1915(a)(1) of the Act for the 
delivery of waiver and other services. Participants may voluntarily elect to receive waiver and other services 
through such MCOs or prepaid health plans. Contracts with these health plans are on file at the state 
Medicaid agency.
Describe: (a) the MCOs and/or health plans that furnish services under the provisions of §1915(a)(1); (b) the 
geographic areas served by these plans; (c) the waiver and other services furnished by these plans; and, (d) 
how payments are made to the health plans.
 
 
 
 This waiver is a part of a concurrent §1915(b)/§1915(c) waiver. Participants are required to obtain waiver 
and other services through a MCO and/or prepaid inpatient health plan (PIHP) or a prepaid ambulatory 
health plan (PAHP). The §1915(b) waiver specifies the types of health plans that are used and how 
payments to these plans are made.
 This waiver is a part of a concurrent ?1115/?1915(c) waiver. Participants are required to obtain waiver and 
other services through a MCO and/or prepaid inpatient health plan (PIHP) or a prepaid ambulatory health 
plan (PAHP). The ?1115 waiver specifies the types of health plans that are used and how payments to these 
plans are made.
 If the state uses more than one of the above contract authorities for the delivery of waiver services, please 
select this option.
In the textbox below, indicate the contract authorities. In addition, if the state contracts with MCOs, PIHPs, 
or PAHPs under the provisions of §1915(a)(1) of the Act to furnish waiver services: Participants may 
voluntarily elect to receive waiver and other services through such MCOs or prepaid health plans. Contracts 
with these health plans are on file at the state Medicaid agency. Describe: (a) the MCOs and/or health plans 
that furnish services under the provisions of §1915(a)(1); (b) the geographic areas served by these plans; (c) 
the waiver and other services furnished by these plans; and, (d) how payments are made to the health plans.
 
 
 
iii. 
Appendix I: Financial Accountability
I-4: Non-Federal Matching Funds (1 of 3)
State Level Source(s) of the Non-Federal Share of Computable Waiver Costs.  Specify the state source or sources of the 
non-federal share of computable waiver costs. Select at least one :
 Appropriation of State Tax Revenues to the State Medicaid agency
 Appropriation of State Tax Revenues to a State Agency other than the Medicaid Agency.
If the source of the non-federal share is appropriations to another state agency (or agencies), specify: (a) the state 
entity or agency receiving appropriated funds and (b) the mechanism that is used to transfer the funds to the 
Medicaid Agency or Fiscal Agent, such as an Intergovernmental Transfer (IGT), including any matching 
arrangement, and/or, indicate if the funds are directly expended by state agencies as CPEs, as indicated in Item I-2-
a. 
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 136 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 137]
c:
 
 
 
 Other State Level Source(s) of Funds.
Specify: (a) the source and nature of funds; (b) the entity or agency that receives the funds; and, (c) the mechanism 
that is used to transfer the funds to the Medicaid Agency or Fiscal Agent, such as an Intergovernmental Transfer 
(IGT), including any matching arrangement, and/or, indicate if funds are directly expended by state agencies as 
CPEs, as indicated in Item I-2-c:
 
 
 
Appendix I: Financial Accountability
I-4: Non-Federal Matching Funds (2 of 3)
Local Government or Other Source(s) of the Non-Federal Share of Computable Waiver Costs.  Specify the source or 
sources of the non-federal share of computable waiver costs that are not from state sources. Select One :
 Not Applicable . There are no local government level sources of funds utilized as the non-federal share.
 Applicable
Check each that applies:
 Appropriation of Local Government Revenues.
Specify: (a) the local government entity or entities that have the authority to levy taxes or other revenues; (b) the 
source(s) of revenue; and, (c) the mechanism that is used to transfer the funds to the Medicaid Agency or Fiscal 
Agent, such as an Intergovernmental Transfer (IGT), including any matching arrangement (indicate any 
intervening entities in the transfer process), and/or, indicate if funds are directly expended by local government 
agencies as CPEs, as specified in Item I-2-c:
 
 
 
 Other Local Government Level Source(s) of Funds.
Specify: (a) the source of funds; (b) the local government entity or agency receiving funds; and, (c) the 
mechanism that is used to transfer the funds to the state Medicaid agency or fiscal agent, such as an 
Intergovernmental Transfer (IGT), including any matching arrangement, and/or, indicate if funds are directly 
expended by local government agencies as CPEs, as specified in Item I-2-c:
 
 
 
b. 
Appendix I: Financial Accountability
I-4: Non-Federal Matching Funds (3 of 3)
Information Concerning Certain Sources of Funds.  Indicate whether any of the funds listed in Items I-4-a or I-4-b that 
make up the non-federal share of computable waiver costs come from the following sources: (a) health care-related taxes 
or fees; (b) provider-related donations; and/or, (c) federal funds. Select one :
c. 
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 137 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 138]
None of the specified sources of funds contribute to the non-federal share of computable waiver costs
 The following source(s) are used
Check each that applies:
 Health care-related taxes or fees
 Provider-related donations
 Federal funds
For each source of funds indicated above, describe the source of the funds in detail:
 
 
 
Appendix I: Financial Accountability
I-5: Exclusion of Medicaid Payment for Room and Board
Services Furnished in Residential Settings.  Select one:
 No services under this waiver are furnished in residential settings other than the private residence of the 
individual.
 As specified in Appendix C, the state furnishes waiver services in residential settings other than the personal home 
of the individual.
a. 
Method for Excluding the Cost of Room and Board Furnished in Residential Settings.  The following describes the 
methodology that the state uses to exclude Medicaid payment for room and board in residential settings:
 
In the RCFE/ARF setting, the participant pays the facility directly for the provision of room and board at the beginning 
of the month from his/her SSI/SSP income, retaining the Personal Needs Allowance as governed by regulation. The 
facility bills the Medi-Cal program for the care rendered at the end of the month, only billing for the days in which the 
participant was enrolled in the waiver. 
 
In the PSH setting, the participant pays their rent directly to the housing authority. The HHA is responsible for the 
preparation of food, but not the purchase of bulk food items  
b. 
Appendix I: Financial Accountability
I-6: Payment for Rent and Food Expenses of an Unrelated Live-In Caregiver
Reimbursement for the Rent and Food Expenses of an Unrelated Live-In Personal Caregiver.  Select one:
 No. The state does not reimburse for the rent and food expenses of an unrelated live-in personal caregiver who 
resides in the same household as the participant.
 Yes. Per 42 CFR §441.310(a)(2)(ii), the state will claim FFP for the additional costs of rent and food that can 
be reasonably attributed to an unrelated live-in personal caregiver who resides in the same household as the 
waiver participant. The state describes its coverage of live-in caregiver in Appendix C-3 and the costs 
attributable to rent and food for the live-in caregiver are reflected separately in the computation of factor D 
(cost of waiver services) in Appendix J. FFP for rent and food for a live-in caregiver will not be claimed when 
the participant lives in the caregiver's home or in a residence that is owned or leased by the provider of 
Medicaid services.
The following is an explanation of: (a) the method used to apportion the additional costs of rent and food attributable to 
the unrelated live-in personal caregiver that are incurred by the individual served on the waiver and (b) the method 
used to reimburse these costs:
 
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 138 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 139]
Appendix I: Financial Accountability
I-7: Participant Co-Payments for Waiver Services and Other Cost Sharing (1 of 5)
Co-Payment Requirements.  Specify whether the state imposes a co-payment or similar charge upon waiver participants 
for waiver services. These charges are calculated per service and have the effect of reducing the total computable claim 
for federal financial participation. Select one:
 No. The state does not impose a co-payment or similar charge upon participants for waiver services.
 Yes. The state imposes a co-payment or similar charge upon participants for one or more waiver services.
Co-Pay Arrangement.
Specify the types of co-pay arrangements that are imposed on waiver participants ( check each that applies ):
Charges Associated with the Provision of Waiver Services  (if any are checked, complete Items I-7-a-ii 
through I-7-a-iv):
 Nominal deductible
 Coinsurance
 Co-Payment
 Other charge
Specify:
 
 
 
i. 
a. 
Appendix I: Financial Accountability
I-7: Participant Co-Payments for Waiver Services and Other Cost Sharing (2 of 5)
Co-Payment Requirements.
Participants Subject to Co-pay Charges for Waiver Services.
Answers provided in Appendix I-7-a indicate that you do not need to complete this section.
ii. 
a. 
Appendix I: Financial Accountability
I-7: Participant Co-Payments for Waiver Services and Other Cost Sharing (3 of 5)
Co-Payment Requirements.
Amount of Co-Pay Charges for Waiver Services.
Answers provided in Appendix I-7-a indicate that you do not need to complete this section.
iii. 
a. 
Appendix I: Financial Accountability
I-7: Participant Co-Payments for Waiver Services and Other Cost Sharing (4 of 5)
Co-Payment Requirements.
Cumulative Maximum Charges.iv. 
a. 
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 139 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 140]
Answers provided in Appendix I-7-a indicate that you do not need to complete this section.
Appendix I: Financial Accountability
I-7: Participant Co-Payments for Waiver Services and Other Cost Sharing (5 of 5)
Other State Requirement for Cost Sharing.  Specify whether the state imposes a premium, enrollment fee or similar cost 
sharing on waiver participants. Select one :
 No. The state does not impose a premium, enrollment fee, or similar cost-sharing arrangement on waiver 
participants.
 Yes. The state imposes a premium, enrollment fee or similar cost-sharing arrangement.
Describe in detail the cost sharing arrangement, including: (a) the type of cost sharing (e.g., premium, enrollment 
fee); (b) the amount of charge and how the amount of the charge is related to total gross family income; (c) the 
groups of participants subject to cost-sharing and the groups who are excluded; and, (d) the mechanisms for the 
collection of cost-sharing and reporting the amount collected on the CMS 64:
 
 
 
b. 
Appendix J: Cost Neutrality Demonstration
J-1: Composite Overview and Demonstration of Cost-Neutrality Formula
Composite Overview.  Complete the fields in Cols. 3, 5 and 6 in the following table for each waiver year. The fields in Cols. 
4, 7 and 8 are auto-calculated based on entries in Cols 3, 5, and 6. The fields in Col. 2 are auto-calculated using the Factor 
D data from the J-2-d Estimate of Factor D tables. Col. 2 fields will be populated ONLY when the Estimate of Factor D 
tables in J-2-d have been completed.
Level(s) of Care: Nursing Facility
Col. 1 Col. 2 Col. 3 Col. 4 Col. 5 Col. 6 Col. 7 Col. 8
Year Factor D Factor D' Total: D+D' Factor G Factor G' Total: G+G' Difference (Col 7 less Column4)
1 23915.64 5500.00 29415.64 46415.00 5600.00 52015.00 22599.36
2 25793.12 5665.00 31458.12 47807.00 5768.00 53575.00 22116.88
3 25659.47 5835.00 31494.47 49242.00 5941.00 55183.00 23688.53
4 25660.36 6010.00 31670.36 50719.00 6119.00 56838.00 25167.64
5 25650.68 6190.00 31840.68 52240.00 6303.00 58543.00 26702.32
Appendix J: Cost Neutrality Demonstration
J-2: Derivation of Estimates (1 of 9 )
Number Of Unduplicated Participants Served.  Enter the total number of unduplicated participants from Item B-3-a who 
will be served each year that the waiver is in operation. When the waiver serves individuals under more than one level of 
care, specify the number of unduplicated participants for each level of care:
Distribution of Unduplicated Participants by 
Level of Care (if applicable)
Level of Care:
Nursing Facility
Waiver Year Total Unduplicated Number of Participants 
(from Item B-3-a)
Year 1 7409 7409
Table: J-2-a: Unduplicated Participants
a. 
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 140 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 141]
Distribution of Unduplicated Participants by 
Level of Care (if applicable)
Level of Care:
Nursing Facility
Waiver Year Total Unduplicated Number of Participants 
(from Item B-3-a)
Year 2 7409 7409
Year 3 9660 9660
Year 4 13050 13050
Year 5 16440 16440
Appendix J: Cost Neutrality Demonstration
J-2: Derivation of Estimates (2 of 9 )
Average Length of Stay.  Describe the basis of the estimate of the average length of stay on the waiver by participants in 
item J-2-a.
 
The Average Length of Stay (ALOS) for waiver participants is 289 days.  The ALOS is based on 372 reports from 17/18, 
18/19, and 19/20. 
 
ALW enrollment experience shows that participants enrolled in the waiver will maintain continuous enrollment until 
forced to leave due to illness or death.  The ALOS is expected to remain constant each waiver year. 
 
The ALOS estimate is consistent with the turnover rate. ALW enrollment trends show that the Waiver experiences an 
attrition rate of approximately 29% unduplicated participants on average each Waiver Year.  
b. 
Appendix J: Cost Neutrality Demonstration
J-2: Derivation of Estimates (3 of 9 )
Derivation of Estimates for Each Factor.  Provide a narrative description for the derivation of the estimates of the 
following factors.
Factor D Derivation. The estimates of Factor D for each waiver year are located in Item J-2-d. The basis and 
methodology for these estimates is as follows:
 
i. 
c. 
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 141 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 142]
Enrollment levels per Tier were calculated by using an average of the three previous State fiscal years (2017/18, 
2018/19, and 2019/20). Eligible participants for Tiers one through five are determined to be at the Nursing 
Facility Level A or Nursing Facility Level B Level of Care as per the California Code of Regulations (CCR) 
Sections 51120 (Intermediate Care Services, NF-A) and 51124 (Skilled Nursing Services NF-B). 
 
Tier 1 11% 
Tier 2 35% 
Tier 3 18% 
Tier 4 36% 
Tier 5 1% 
 
Estimated Number of Users:  The number of unduplicated participants for each waiver year of this amendment is 
estimated using a baseline of 7409 unduplicated participants and 5744 maximum clients served. The State is 
assuming an increase of 194 clients per month. The growth rate of ALW participants is based on projected 
increases in the provider network and waiver capacity and allows for extra capacity in order to avoid dis-
enrollments and waiting lists at waiver agencies. The baseline 5744 client count in Waiver Year 3 is based on the 
currently approved maximum waiver capacity. 
 
Avg. Units/User: The utilization percentages were developed by calculating the percent of participants that 
utilized each service in 2017, 2018, and 2019 based on CMS 372 reports data. The percent utilization was applied 
to the projected participants going forward for 2021-2024. 
 
Avg. Cost/Unit: Actual average of cost per beneficiary over Waiver years 2017, 2018, and 2019 for each service 
category. 
Total Cost: Estimated Number of Users multiplied by the Avg. Units/User multiplied by the Cost/Unit. 
 
The NF Transition Services, Service Assessment/Plan of Care Development, and Residential Habilitation 
utilizations and user cost per units are calculated based on an average of the 17/18, 18/19, and 19/20, 372 
reports. 
 
Factor D is calculated based on an average of the 17/18, 18/19, and 19/20, 372 reports. The state plans to add an 
additional 7,000 waiver slots to the currently approved ALW. The state assumes a monthly enrollment rate of 
approximate 194 clients until state FY 2023-2024. 
 
Factor D utilization and cost are calculated based on an average of the 17/18, 18/19, and 19/20, 372 reports for 
NF Transition Services, Service Assessment/Plan of Care Development, and Residential Habilitation. 
 
It is anticipated that NF Transition Services will be rendered to approximately 7% of new enrollees, with an 
estimated cost of 1,111.03 per unit. These numbers, and Assisted Living services average cost per unit, were 
derived from the average of 372 reports from FYs 17/18, 18/19, and 19/20.  
Factor D' Derivation. The estimates of Factor D' for each waiver year are included in Item J-1. The basis of these 
estimates is as follows:
 
ii. 
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 142 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 143]
Factor D' is State Plan services and  calculated based on the WY 16/17 372 report. There is a three percent 
projected increase in these costs for each WY.   Factor D’ estimates are slightly less than Factor G’ estimates 
because State Plan services (Factor D’) are less utilized because the Waiver provides continuous care to a lower 
acuity population. 
 
Medicare Part D drug costs are not included in the Factor D estimates. 
 
The state has updated the Factor D’ projections to add in a 3% increase for each WY. For Factor D’ projections, 
the state is basing a 3% increase to align with the California Legislature approved 3% compound annual 
increase for institutional facilities. 
 
Factor D' is the estimated annual average per capita Medicaid cost for all services (state plan and services 
required under EPSDT(when a waiver serves children)) that are furnished in addition to waiver services while the 
individual is in the waiver.  This calculation includes institutional costs when a person leaves the waiver for the 
institution and returns to the waiver in the same waiver year.  
Factor G Derivation. The estimates of Factor G for each waiver year are included in Item J-1. The basis of these 
estimates is as follows:
 
Factor  G estimates are based on the assumption that 20% of the waiver participants are at NF-A level of care 
and the other 80% are at NF-B level of care. The state sampled claims data from institution costs with similar 
levels of care based on the average length of stay from the 14/15, 15/16, and 16/17, 372 reports. 
 
The state added a conservative 3% increase each year to account for annual inflation in healthcare costs. The 
state is basing a 3% increase to each WY to align with the average increase of the historical California State 
Published for NF A/B 2014-17 rates.  
iii. 
Factor G' Derivation. The estimates of Factor G' for each waiver year are included in Item J-1. The basis of these 
estimates is as follows:
 
The Factor G' estimates the State Plan services utilization during inpatient NF A/B hospitalizations and are based 
on an average of actual utilizations for WY1: $5,563; WY2: $6,838; WY 3: $4,369.  The state assumed a three 
percent rate increase for each WY. The state is basing a 3% increase to align with the California Legislature 
approved 3% compound annual increase for institutional facilities. 
 
Medicare Part D drug costs are not included in the Factor G' estimates.  
iv. 
Appendix J: Cost Neutrality Demonstration
J-2: Derivation of Estimates (4 of 9 )
Component management for waiver services. If the service(s) below includes two or more discrete services that are reimbursed 
separately, or is a bundled service, each component of the service must be listed. Select “ manage components ” to add these 
components.
Waiver Services
Assisted Living Services - Homemaker; Home Health Aide; Personal Care
Care Coordination
Residential Habilitation
Augmented Plan of Care Development and Follow-up
NF Transition Care Coordination
Appendix J: Cost Neutrality Demonstration
J-2: Derivation of Estimates (5 of 9 )
Estimate of Factor D.d. 
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 143 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 144]
i. Non-Concurrent Waiver.  Complete the following table for each waiver year. Enter data into the Unit, # Users, Avg. 
Units Per User, and Avg. Cost/Unit fields for all the Waiver Service/Component items. Select Save and Calculate to 
automatically calculate and populate the Component Costs and Total Costs fields. All fields in this table must be 
completed in order to populate the Factor D fields in the J-1 Composite Overview table.
Waiver Year: Year 1
Waiver Service/ 
Component Unit # Users Avg. Units Per User Avg. Cost/ Unit Component 
Cost Total Cost
Assisted Living 
Services - 
Homemaker; Home 
Health Aide; 
Personal Care  
Total:
151803964.17
Assisted Living 
Services - 
Homemaker; 
Home Health 
Aide; Personal 
Care
Day 7409 251.00 81.63 151803964.17
Care Coordination  
Total: 21337920.00
Care 
Coordination Month 7409 9.00 320.00 21337920.00
Residential 
Habilitation  Total: 2365908.75
Residential 
Habilitation 15 Minute 15 23367.00 6.75 2365908.75
Augmented Plan of 
Care Development 
and Follow-up  
Total:
24000.00
Augmented Plan 
of Care 
Development 
and Follow-up
Month 15 5.00 320.00 24000.00
NF Transition Care 
Coordination  Total: 1659200.00
NF Transition One-time 1037 1.00 1600.00 1659200.00
GRAND TOTAL: 177190992.92
Total Estimated Unduplicated Participants: 7409
Factor D (Divide total by number of participants): 23915.64
Average Length of Stay on the Waiver: 260
Appendix J: Cost Neutrality Demonstration
J-2: Derivation of Estimates (6 of 9 )
Estimate of Factor D.
i. Non-Concurrent Waiver.  Complete the following table for each waiver year. Enter data into the Unit, # Users, Avg. 
Units Per User, and Avg. Cost/Unit fields for all the Waiver Service/Component items. Select Save and Calculate to 
automatically calculate and populate the Component Costs and Total Costs fields. All fields in this table must be 
completed in order to populate the Factor D fields in the J-1 Composite Overview table.
d. 
Waiver Year: Year 2
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 144 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 145]
Waiver Service/ 
Component Unit # Users Avg. Units Per User Avg. Cost/ Unit Component 
Cost Total Cost
Assisted Living 
Services - 
Homemaker; Home 
Health Aide; 
Personal Care  
Total:
165714213.49
Assisted Living 
Services - 
Homemaker; 
Home Health 
Aide; Personal 
Care
Day 7409 251.00 89.11 165714213.49
Care Coordination  
Total: 21337920.00
Care 
Coordination Month 7409 9.00 320.00 21337920.00
Residential 
Habilitation  Total: 2365908.75
Residential 
Habilitation 15 Minute 15 23367.00 6.75 2365908.75
Augmented Plan of 
Care Development 
and Follow-up  
Total:
24000.00
Augmented Plan 
of Care 
Development 
and Follow-up
Month 15 5.00 320.00 24000.00
NF Transition Care 
Coordination  Total: 1659200.00
NF Transition One-time 1037 1.00 1600.00 1659200.00
GRAND TOTAL: 191101242.24
Total Estimated Unduplicated Participants: 7409
Factor D (Divide total by number of participants): 25793.12
Average Length of Stay on the Waiver: 260
Appendix J: Cost Neutrality Demonstration
J-2: Derivation of Estimates (7 of 9 )
Estimate of Factor D.
i. Non-Concurrent Waiver.  Complete the following table for each waiver year. Enter data into the Unit, # Users, Avg. 
Units Per User, and Avg. Cost/Unit fields for all the Waiver Service/Component items. Select Save and Calculate to 
automatically calculate and populate the Component Costs and Total Costs fields. All fields in this table must be 
completed in order to populate the Factor D fields in the J-1 Composite Overview table.
d. 
Waiver Year: Year 3
Waiver Service/ 
Component Unit # Users Avg. Units Per User Avg. Cost/ Unit Component 
Cost Total Cost
Assisted Living 
Services - 
Homemaker; Home 
203814039.92
GRAND TOTAL: 247870460.20
Total Estimated Unduplicated Participants: 9660
Factor D (Divide total by number of participants): 25659.47
Average Length of Stay on the Waiver: 289
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 145 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 146]
Waiver Service/ 
Component Unit # Users Avg. Units Per User Avg. Cost/ Unit Component 
Cost Total Cost
Health Aide; 
Personal Care  
Total:
Assisted Living 
Services - 
Homemaker; 
Home Health 
Aide; Personal 
Care
Day 9370 278.12 78.21 203814039.92
Care Coordination  
Total: 28719091.20
Care 
Coordination Month 9467 9.48 320.00 28719091.20
Residential 
Habilitation  Total: 14017335.48
Residential 
Habilitation 15 Minute 97 21862.12 6.61 14017335.48
Augmented Plan of 
Care Development 
and Follow-up  
Total:
238393.60
Augmented Plan 
of Care 
Development 
and Follow-up
Month 386 1.93 320.00 238393.60
NF Transition Care 
Coordination  Total: 1081600.00
NF Transition One-time 676 1.00 1600.00 1081600.00
GRAND TOTAL: 247870460.20
Total Estimated Unduplicated Participants: 9660
Factor D (Divide total by number of participants): 25659.47
Average Length of Stay on the Waiver: 289
Appendix J: Cost Neutrality Demonstration
J-2: Derivation of Estimates (8 of 9)
Estimate of Factor D.
i. Non-Concurrent Waiver.  Complete the following table for each waiver year. Enter data into the Unit, # Users, Avg. 
Units Per User, and Avg. Cost/Unit fields for all the Waiver Service/Component items. Select Save and Calculate to 
automatically calculate and populate the Component Costs and Total Costs fields. All fields in this table must be 
completed in order to populate the Factor D fields in the J-1 Composite Overview table.
d. 
Waiver Year: Year 4
Waiver Service/ 
Component Unit # Users Avg. Units Per User Avg. Cost/ Unit Component 
Cost Total Cost
Assisted Living 
Services - 
Homemaker; Home 
Health Aide; 
Personal Care  
Total:
275355595.67
GRAND TOTAL: 334867721.60
Total Estimated Unduplicated Participants: 13050
Factor D (Divide total by number of participants): 25660.36
Average Length of Stay on the Waiver: 289
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 146 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 147]
Waiver Service/ 
Component Unit # Users Avg. Units Per User Avg. Cost/ Unit Component 
Cost Total Cost
Assisted Living 
Services - 
Homemaker; 
Home Health 
Aide; Personal 
Care
Day 12659 278.12 78.21 275355595.67
Care Coordination  
Total: 38796710.40
Care 
Coordination Month 12789 9.48 320.00 38796710.40
Residential 
Habilitation  Total: 18930628.33
Residential 
Habilitation 15 Minute 131 21862.12 6.61 18930628.33
Augmented Plan of 
Care Development 
and Follow-up  
Total:
322387.20
Augmented Plan 
of Care 
Development 
and Follow-up
Month 522 1.93 320.00 322387.20
NF Transition Care 
Coordination  Total: 1462400.00
NF Transition One-time 914 1.00 1600.00 1462400.00
GRAND TOTAL: 334867721.60
Total Estimated Unduplicated Participants: 13050
Factor D (Divide total by number of participants): 25660.36
Average Length of Stay on the Waiver: 289
Appendix J: Cost Neutrality Demonstration
J-2: Derivation of Estimates (9 of 9)
Estimate of Factor D.
i. Non-Concurrent Waiver.  Complete the following table for each waiver year. Enter data into the Unit, # Users, Avg. 
Units Per User, and Avg. Cost/Unit fields for all the Waiver Service/Component items. Select Save and Calculate to 
automatically calculate and populate the Component Costs and Total Costs fields. All fields in this table must be 
completed in order to populate the Factor D fields in the J-1 Composite Overview table.
d. 
Waiver Year: Year 5
Waiver Service/ 
Component Unit # Users Avg. Units Per User Avg. Cost/ Unit Component 
Cost Total Cost
Assisted Living 
Services - 
Homemaker; Home 
Health Aide; 
Personal Care  
Total:
346875399.64
Assisted Living 
Services - 
Homemaker; 
Day 15947 278.12 78.21 346875399.64
GRAND TOTAL: 421697122.61
Total Estimated Unduplicated Participants: 16440
Factor D (Divide total by number of participants): 25650.68
Average Length of Stay on the Waiver: 289
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 147 of 148
11/01/2023

[page 148]
Waiver Service/ 
Component Unit # Users Avg. Units Per User Avg. Cost/ Unit Component 
Cost Total Cost
Home Health 
Aide; Personal 
Care
Care Coordination  
Total: 48874329.60
Care 
Coordination Month 16111 9.48 320.00 48874329.60
Residential 
Habilitation  Total: 23699412.56
Residential 
Habilitation 15 Minute 164 21862.12 6.61 23699412.56
Augmented Plan of 
Care Development 
and Follow-up  
Total:
406380.80
Augmented Plan 
of Care 
Development 
and Follow-up
Month 658 1.93 320.00 406380.80
NF Transition Care 
Coordination  Total: 1841600.00
NF Transition One-time 1151 1.00 1600.00 1841600.00
GRAND TOTAL: 421697122.61
Total Estimated Unduplicated Participants: 16440
Factor D (Divide total by number of participants): 25650.68
Average Length of Stay on the Waiver: 289
Application for 1915(c) HCBS Waiver: CA.0431.R03.12 - Nov 12, 2023 (as of Nov 12, 2023) Page 148 of 148
11/01/2023