Home
Services
1915(c) Home and Community-Based Services Waivers
1915(c) Home and Community-Based Services Waivers
Home and Community-Based Services (HCBS) Waivers allow states that participate in Medicaid, known as Medi-Cal in California, to develop creative alternatives for individuals who would otherwise require care in a nursing facility or hospital. Medi-Cal has an agreement with the Federal Government, which allows for waiver services to be offered in either a home or community setting. The services offered under the waiver must cost no more than the alternative institutional level of care. Recipients of HCBS Waivers must have full-scope Medi-Cal eligibility.
What Services are Offered under HCBS Waivers?
The services available under HCBS Waivers include case management, community transition services, private duty nursing, family training, home health aides, life-sustaining utility reimbursement, habilitation services, respite care, and other services required to maintain the health and safety of eligible participants in the community setting of their choice.
Who Provides the Services?
There are a variety of HCBS Waiver providers, including but not limited to, the following:
Licensed and certified Home Health Agencies;
Individually licensed HCBS Waiver Providers; and/or
Unlicensed caregivers.
How Long Can One Receive These Services?
The beneficiary may receive these home- and community-based services as long as they are medically necessary, cost-neutral, and he/she meets the nursing facility or acute hospital level of care.
How do I Become a HCBS Waiver Service Provider?
For information on becoming one of the following HCBS waiver providers or to request an application, please contact Provider Enrollment at (916) 552-9105. Email inquiries can be sent to:
ProFacWAIVER@dhcs.ca.gov
.
HCBS Waiver Nurse Provider – RN and LVN (Individual Nurse Provider)
INP Medi-Cal Checklist
Home and Community-Based Services Nursing Facility (Congregate Living Health Facility)
List of Congregate Living Health Facilities
CLHF Medi-Cal Checklist
List of Pediatric Day Health Centers
Non-Profit Organization
Personal Care Agency (PCA)
Licensed Home Care Organizations (HCO) qualify to apply for the PCA provider type.
PCA Medi-Cal Checklist
Professional Corporation
Public Subsidized Housing (PSH)
PSH Initial Application
Home and Community-Based Alternatives (HCBA) Waiver
– Formerly Nursing Facility/Acute Hospital (NF/AH) Waiver
Home-and-Community-Based-Services-(HCBS)–Grievance-and-Hearings
Home and Community-Based Services (HCBS) – Consumer Survey