[page 1]
Michelle Baass | Director 
 
California Department of Health Care Services  
Medi-Cal Eligibility Division 
1501 Capitol Avenue | Sacramento, CA | 95899-7413 
MS 4607 | Phone (916) 552-9200 | www.dhcs.ca.gov 
State of California 
Gavin Newsom, Governor 
 
California Health and Human Services Agency 
 
DATE: February 26, 2026  
 
 
 
TO:   ALL COUNTY WELFARE DIRECTORS       Letter No.: I 26-05 
  ALL COUNTY WELFARE ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICERS 
  ALL COUNTY MEDI-CAL PROGRAM SPECIALISTS/LIAISONS 
   
 
SUBJECT: REMINDERS REGARDING INSTITUTIONAL DEEMING AND THE DISABILITY 
DETERMINATION PROCESS FOR INDIVIDUALS RECEIVING HOME AND 
COMMUNITY-BASED SERVICES (HCBS) WAIVERS 
 
 
Purpose 
The purpose of this Medi-Cal Eligibility Division Information Letter (MEDIL) is to remind 
counties about existing policies for institutional deeming and the disability 
determination process for individuals receiving Home and Community-Based Services 
(HCBS) Waivers.  
 
Background 
Medi-Cal applicants or members who are aged, blind, or disabled and are not eligible 
under Modified Adjusted Gross Income (MAGI) Medi-Cal must be evaluated for Non-
MAGI Medi-Cal eligibility in accordance with the eligibility hierarchy outlined in All 
County Welfare Directors Letter (ACWDL) 17-03.  Consistent with ACWDL 25-25, 
counties must first attempt to determine Non-MAGI eligibility through an ex parte 
review. If a county cannot determine Non-MAGI Medi-Cal through the ex parte review, 
the county must mail and process the Non-MAGI Screening Packet. Counties must 
ensure that Non-MAGI screening is completed timely to prevent incorrect eligibility 
determinations, including the inappropriate assignment of a share of cost (SOC) or 
denial of full-scope Medi-Cal coverage. Full-scope Medi-Cal eligibility is required for 
individuals receiving services through Home and Community-Based Services (HCBS) 
Waivers.

[page 2]
Letter No.: I 26-05 
Page 2 
February 26, 2026 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Please note: Beginning January 1, 2026, assets will be considered in eligibility 
determinations for Non-MAGI Medi-Cal programs except for the Pickle, Disabled Adult 
Child (DAC), and Disabled Widow/er (DW) programs. 
 
HCBS Waivers 
HCBS Waivers allow eligible individuals, who require a level of care typically provided in 
a skilled nursing facility or hospital, to receive necessary services in their own home or 
community settings. The most common HCBS waivers include:  
• Home and Community Based Alternatives (HCBA) Waiver 
• Assisted Living Waiver (ALW) 
• Multipurpose Senior Services Program (MSSP) 
• Home and Community Based Services for the Developmentally Disabled (HCBS-
DD) 
 
A list of waiver programs can be found on the Department of Health Care Services 
(DHCS) website at https://www.dhcs.ca.gov/services/medi-cal/eligibility/Documents/Co-
OPS-Sup/HCBS-Elig.pdf.  
 
Institutional Deeming 
Institutional deeming rules allow HCBS Waiver recipients, who are eligible for Medi-Cal 
with a SOC or who would be denied for having excess resources, to qualify for Medi-Cal 
based solely on their own income and resources. The waiver recipient is treated as 
institutionalized and placed in a Medi-Cal Family Budget Unit (MFBU) of one, therefore, 
their family’s income and resources are excluded when determining their eligibility for 
Medi-Cal.  
 
Under the institutional deeming rules, a minor’s eligibility is determined based on the 
Aged, Blind and Disabled Federal Poverty Level (ABD FPL) program, if they have a 
mental or physical impairment that meets the same severity of standards used by the 
Social Security Administration (SSA) to determine federal disability for an adult.

[page 3]
Letter No.: I 26-05 
Page 3 
February 26, 2026 
 
 
 
 
 
 
If the child’s disability does not meet the disability requirement, they are evaluated 
according to the income limits of the Medically Needy (MN) program.  
 
 
Age and Eligibility Guidelines 
While there is no age limit for institutional deeming, the following criteria are used to 
determine whether an individual is classified as a child or an adult for eligibility 
purposes:  
 
Child Classification: 
An individual is considered a child if they are:  
• Under 18 years old, or  
• Under 21 years old and still claimed as a tax dependent. 
 
Adult Classification: 
An individual is considered an adult if they are: 
• Disabled or Medically Needy (MN): A blind or disabled individual between the 
ages of 18 and 21, living at home with a parent or guardian who is not currently 
enrolled in school or a technical vocational program. 
 
• Independent Young Adult: An individual between 18 and 21 years old who does 
not live with a parent or caretaker relative, and is not claimed as a tax dependent, 
and does not receive out-of-home care from a public agency. 
 
• Emancipated Minor: An individual between the ages of 14 and 18 who does not 
live with a parent or caretaker relative and does not have a legal guardian or 
parent handling their financial affairs. 
 
Disability Linkage for Waiver Applicants

[page 4]
Letter No.: I 26-05 
Page 4 
February 26, 2026 
 
 
 
 
 
Waiver eligibility does not automatically establish linkage to a disability-based Medi-Cal 
program. Any applicant or member under age 65 must complete a formal disability 
determination before they can be enrolled in a Non-MAGI Medi-Cal program. If the 
individual has not already been determined federally disabled by SSA, counties must 
follow the guidance in ACWDL 11-11.   
 
If you have any questions regarding the information provided in this letter, please 
contact the Non-MAGI unit at NonMAGIInbox@dhcs.ca.gov. County questions 
regarding policy guidance should be sent to MCED-Policy@dhcs.ca.gov. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
 
 
Sarah Crow, Chief 
Medi-Cal Eligibility Division  
Department of Health Care Services