[page 1]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
Artide 19 - SPECK SERVlCES 
19A - lNDMDUALS ON RESTRICTED SERVICE STATUS DUE TO PROGRAM ABUSE 
1. Background 
2. DDS ResponsibiMes 
3. County Weffire Department Responsibilities 
4. Persons Affected 
5. County Preparation and Submission of MC 177 Forms 
6. Issuance of Appropriate Mediial Card 
195 - THIS SECTION HAS BEEN RmAOVED FROM ARTICLE 19 AND INCORPORATED 
INTO ARTICLE 4V, MINOR CONSENT MEDI-CAL SERVICES, EFFECTIVE 
OCTOBER 24.1 995 
19C - LIMITED SEFWCES FOR MEDICALLY INDIGENT ADULTS IN SNFACF 
1. Background 
2. County Welfare Department ResponsibiBes 
3. Retroactive Eligibility 
4. Medial Identification Card 
19D - HOME AND COMMUNITY-BASED WAIVER PROGRAMS 
. . 
1. Background 
Ill. Waiver Types 
N. Description 
V. General Processing 
VI. Forms 
MANUAL LETTER NO.: DATE: s@ 2 4 1997 PA- ARTICLE19,TC-1

[page 3]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY MANUAL _--------------------------------------------------- 
19A - INDIVIDUALS ON RESTRICTED SERVICE STATUS 
DUE TO PROGRAM ABUSE 
1. BACKGROUND 
The Department of Health Services (DHS) has developed procedures to 
identify and resolve Medi-Cal program abuse by beneficiaries. Benefi- 
ciaries who seek out and repeatedly obtain unnecessary services are 
. issued special Hgdi-Cal identification cards to notify providers that 
prior authorization is required for certain services. Limftations on 
the beneficiaries' Medi-Cal coverage will remain ia force for a 
minhm of one year anless altered by DES or a state hearing decision. 
The DHS: 
a. Identifies beneficiaries to be put on restricted status through 
reviev of beneficiary Mi-Cal service histories. This involves 
a computerized selection process and a professional medical case 
review for selected patients. 
b, Prepares and sends Notices of Action (MC 1705) to the beneficiary 
at least ten days before the restricted service status becomes 
effective, 
c. Furnishes a copy of the written Notice of Action of the bene- 
ficiaries' restricted service status to the county prior to the 
first of the manth in which the restriction becomes effective. 
d. Issues Mi-Cal identification cards to the beneficiary vith. 
"restricted service" notations on the card, Currently, these 
messages are: 
(I) Restricted Drugs, coded %I", 
(2) Restricted Scheduled Drugs, coded "R5". 
(3) Restricted H.D. Visits, coded "R11". 
(4) Restricted I)Ngs/H.D,, coded "R12". 
nrrmraL LETTER NO. 81 (8/8/85) 19A-1 ----------------------------------------------------

[page 4]
MEDI-CAL ELtGlBl LlTY MANUAL _-_------------------------------------------------- 
I 
(5) Restricted to Primary H-D., coded "R14". 
(6) Restricted to Primary K,D./Drugs, coded "RlS*'. 
e. Rwides each responsible county vith a monthly report of all 
individuals, including Supplemental Security IncmeIState Supple- 
mentary Payment (SSIISSP), vho are on restricted service status. 
f. Reviews.and, if appropriate, authorizes all Iledi-Cal drug and/or 
I4.D.. visit requests for the beneficiary. (Prwiders have been 
informed by provider bulletin that prior departmental approval is 
required by.the special coding indicated on tbe Mi-Cal identifi- 
cation cards. ) 
The c-ty welfare department is responsible for: 
a. Beferring to the monthly listing (Lfmited Service Status Register 
(LSSR)) issued by DBS when processing requests for replacement1 
supplemental Wgdi-Cal cards for SSI/SSP beneficiaries, and for 
all other Mi-Cal beneficiaries in the event of the WEDS system 
befog inoperational. 
b- Accepting and forwarding requests for state hearing from persons 
vho uant to appeal their restricted semice status. Restricted 
service beneficiaries my request a state hearing within 90 days 
of the initial action by DHS. Restricted semice status shall 
not be lifted because of the hear* request. 
Restricted serPice beneficiaries may include any Medi-Cal beneficiary. 
If a member of a multiperson &di-Cal Family Budget Unit (KFBU) is put 
on restricted semce status, this.uillnot affect the status of the 
other family members of the MFBU, 
Counties need not make any special notations on the MC 177 forms of 
persons on restricted selvice status in order to have the special 
restricted serpice Mi-Cal card generated. %put fram DEB is stored 
in the WEDS computer file which is used to generate share-of-cost 
Mi-Cal cards-

[page 5]
MEDI-CAL ELiGIBlLlN MANUAL ---------------------------------------------------- 
I 19C -- LPLITED SERVICES FOR HEDICALLY INDIGERT 
ADULTS IN SHFfICF 
AB 799 (1982)- as modified by SB 2012 (1982), mandated the State to 
discontinue the medically indigent adult (MIA) category, with a feu 
exceptions, from the Medi-Cal program and to transfer responsibility 
for the health care of those persans to the counties effective January 1, 
1983. 
One of the exceptions to tLe discantfnned :HIBs .is the category of MBs 
resuing 'in a skilled ssursiag facility (SHP) or intermediate care 
facility (ICF) who are identified by the Aid Code 53. Uhile a MIA is 
a resident of an SHFfICF, heishe is entitled to all benefits normally 
cwered by Mi-Cal. However, should that HIA beneficiary becane an 
inpatient at an acute care hospital, any sexvice rendered during that 
hospital stay will not be cwered by the Medi-Cal program. 
2. COUNTY WELFARE DEPAXDBNT RESPOlQSIBILITY 
If an MIA beneficiary in an SHFfICF (Aid Code 53) becomes an inpatient 
at an acute care facility, the mi-Cal program will deny payment for 
any acute care hospital semices. Therefore, an evaluation or referral 
must be initiated by the county welfare department or other responsible 
agency to determine possible eligibility for connty medical assistance 
for tbose senrices not cwered under the Mi-Cal program. 
An KIB beneficiary map have conmirent did Code 53 Medi-Cal cwerage 
and county medical assistance in any month in which medical semdces 
were received in both an SHF/ICF and an acute care facility. In 
addition, should a disability evaluation subsequently be approved, Aid 
Code 53 should be chsnged to a disabled aid code category effective 
with or retroactive to the disability onset date. 
EXAMPLE: I&. Sirtith, age 58, enters an SHF on February 7 as an MA. 
Mr. Smith falls on February 12, injures himself, and is sent by ambu- 
lance to the hospital for acute care. On February 15, Lfr. Smith is 
returned to the SXF vhere he remains until his release on March 25. 
Section 50251 NO- 81 (8/8/85 ) 19C-1 ----------------------------------------------------

[page 6]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY MANUAL --------------------------.------------------------- 
Benefits cwered by Hedi-Cal for February (assuming medical necessity 
is established for all seroices) include any outpatient serpices 
recelved by lfr. kith during the month of Febr~ary;.the care he received 
in the SIP fram February 7 to 12, February 15 to 28, and Warch 1 to 
25; rrmbulance service; bed-hold at the SW for a maxfmam of seven days 
during Mr. Smith's stay in acute care; and ;?my other care (e.g., 
pharmaceuticals, therapy) provided to Mr. Smith while he was in the 
sm. 
%mice8 received daring Mr. Smith's stay at the acute care hospital 
are - not cwered by Wdi-Cal, including the sedces of his physicians, 
podiatrists, or dentists, even though Mr. Smith ranabed on Mi-Cal 
for the entire month of February. Evaluation for possible county 
medical assistance should be done for those expenses incurred while 
Br. Smith was in the acute care facility. Mr. Smith receives a March 
W-Cal card because of his continued residence in the SW. Ee also 
receives an April Wedl-Cal card sbce there ms insufficient time for 
the f~ooty to Issue a Notice of Action for discontinuance after his 
release from the SRF on Wrch 25. 
?Ih map be eligible for retroactive eligibility if both of the follow- 
fng conditiaas are met: 
I * The IEA resided in an S#F/ICF for one day or more durhg the 
month of application, I 
b. The resided in an SlE/ICP for one day or -re during the 
retroactive r~onth(8) for which Mi-Cal coverage is reqaested. 
The retroactive -th(s) are also coded with Aid Code 53, and the same 
serPices are cwered in the retroactive moath(s) as in the current 
month of eligibility. 
Aid We 53 identifies a recipient as eligible for Medi-Cal benefits 
lfmited to senrice8 (outpatient or inpatient) received while residhg 
in an SNF/ICF. County welfare departments need not input any special 
code to indicate eligibility to Lirmfted services. The Wed&-Cal identi- 
fication card for bid Code 53 contains the following restriction 
message: 
"Services to acute hospital Inpatients are not cwered." 
---------------------------------------------------- 
Section 50251 MANUAL LETTER HO. 85 ( 8/8/85) 19C-2

[page 7]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
19D -- HOME AND COMMUNITY-BASED SERVICES (HCBS) WAIVERS 
1. BACKGROUND 
Section 191 5(c) of Title XIX of the Social Security Act, Section 14132(s) of the Welfare and 
Institutions Code, and Section 51346 of Title 22, California Code of Regulations permits states to 
request waivers of otherwise applicable federal law in order to provide certain services to persons at 
home or in the community as a cost neutral alternative to institutionalized health care, provided such 
non-institutional services meet the health and safety needs of the beneficiary. The goal is that the 
beneficiary will experience an enhanced and enriched quality of life if allowed to return home or to the 
community. The Department of Health Services (DHS) currently has six such waivers in effect. 
Congress also authorized Early and Periodic Screening, Diagnosis, and Treatment (EPSDT) for 
eligible individuals under 21 years of age. EPSDT is a Medi-Cal benefit that requires that states 
provide medically necessary screening, vision, hearing, and dental services to Medi-Cal beneficiaries. 
One of the services that may be provided is licensed skilled nursing in the home. Therefore, Medi-Cal 
eligible children who are institutionalized will now be able to return home from institutionalization or 
those who are home can remain at home because they can receive additional medical services under 
the EPSDT program if certain criteria, including cost effectiveness, are met. It is no longer necessary 
that all children be in a waiver to receive expanded benefits if the child has a zero share of cost (SOC) 
under regular Medi-Cal incornelproperty rules. The Section 19-D procedures apply, however, if a 
waiver is required. 
Assembly Bill (AB) 2779, Chapter 329, Statues of 1998, provides for the expansion of the Personal 
Care Services Program (PCSP) to the aged, blind or disabled medically needy. Prior to this, PCSP 
was offered to categorical and mandatory Medi-Cal coverage groups (e.g., Supplemental Security 
Income (SSI) recipients, Pickle beneficiaries, CalWORKs and Section 1931(b) recipients and 
pregnant women or children in the federal poverty level programs who meet the criteria for this 
program). 
PCSP provides the following services: 
Assistance to ambulate 
Bathing, oral hygiene, dressing, and grooming 
Care and assistance with prosthetic devices 
Bowel, bladder and menstrual care 
Repositioning, range of motion exercises and transfers 
Feeding and assurance of adequate fluid intake 
Respiration 
Paramedical services 
Assistance with self-administration of medications 
Ancillary services e.g., meal preparation, laundry, shopping and domestic services (these are 
only offered if other basic PCS are provided). 
PCSP is a component of the In-Home Supportive Services (IHSS) program that also includes the 
IHSS-residual program, but unlike the IHSS-residual program, PCSP is a Medi-Cal benefit. 
The IHSS-residual program and PCSP have some differing requirements. Unlike the IHSS-residual 
program, PCSP does not allow a parent of a minor child or a spouse to be the care provider. Even 
though the Medi-Cal Home and Community-Based Services (HCBS), Multipurpose Senior Services 
SECTION NO.: 51346 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 291 DATE: 09/03/04 19D-1

[page 8]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
Program (MSSP), and Department of Developmental Services (DDS) waivers (as described later in 
these procedures) disregard parental income and resources and also apply spousal impoverishment 
provisions, the IHSS-residual program does not. Therefore, a beneficiary who is ineligible for the 
IHSS-residual program solely because the IHSS-residual program counted parental income and 
resources or did not apply the spousal impoverishment provisions can receive PCSP if otherwise 
eligible. 
II. OVERVIEW 
If the applicant is in a waiver that uses special eligibility rules and helshe has been determined 
medically eligible or potentially medically eligible for a particular waiver, the agency responsible for 
the waiver will refer the applicant to the county contact for a Medi-Cal determination if helshe is not 
already receiving Medi-Cal with no monthly share of cost. Depending on the circumstances, this 
determination may be initiated while the applicant is still institutionalized or in a living arrangement 
different from the setting covered by the waiver. 
Those persons who are applying for waivers that do not follow special eligibility rules, ( Acquired 
Immune Deficiency Syndrome Waiver) or persons who do not or would not have excess property or a 
monthly share of cost using regular Medi-Cal rules will not be referred to a special county waiver 
contact person. If these persons are not already receiving Medi-Cal, they may apply for Medi-Cal like 
any other applicant. 
The following procedures describe the process counties are to follow in determining Medi-Cal 
eligibility. 
A. Medi-Cal Eligibility Waiver Determination - Overview 
There are several factors counties must consider such as the following: 
1. Whether eligibility is to be based on regular Medi-Cal rules or special Medi-Cal rules 
depending on the type of waiver that the applicant will be in. Persons already Medi- 
Cal eligible without a share of cost may be eligible for some of these waivers without 
any special eligibility determination. 
2. Whether the determination is based on anticipated circumstances or on actual 
circumstances (i.e., the current living arrangement is appropriate for the waiver and 
the referring agency already has determined it medically appropriate for the applicant 
to be in the waiver). 
3. Whether the individual is a new applicant or a beneficiary with a change in 
circumstances. 
New Applicant: 
If the waiver applicant is not currently receiving Medi-Cal, helshe must 
complete an Application for Public Assistance and a Statement of Facts and 
meet all other requirements. The individual who is not currently receiving 
Medi-Cal will need an initial Medi-Cal eligibility determination based on 
hislher anticipated living situation. If the applicant has a parent or spouse in 
the home, the major concern is usually whether helshe will be eligible or 
have a high SOC due to parental or spousal income or excess property. 
SECTION NO.: 51346 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 29 1 DATE:09/03/04 19D-2

[page 9]
-MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
Therefore, individuals who are interested in leaving an institution and are 
applying for Medi-Cal and additional in-home services under a waiver need 
to know about their eligibility should they return home, e.g., whether they will 
be Medi-Cal eligible or have a SOC. 
Beneficiary with a Change in Circumstances: 
In some cases, the waiver applicant will be institutionalized and Medi-Cal 
eligible as an institutionalized individual prior to a referring agency 
contacting the CWD; however, depending on the waiver and circumstances, 
many persons may already be de-institutionalized prior to requesting an 
eligibility determination. Some may have never been institutionalized but 
have a high SOC or are in jeopardy of becoming institutionalized because 
their insurance is being terminated. 
If the waiver applicant is currently receiving Medi-Cal-Only, the individual's move 
from an institutional setting to a non-institutional setting or from one community 
setting to another community setting generally will be treated by the county as a 
change in circumstances rather than a new application. 
If an aged, blind, or disabled person is currently institutionalized and is already 
receiving Medi-Cal, helshe is likely to be in hislher own Medi-Cal family budget unit 
(MFBU) or may be receiving Supplemental Security Income (SSI) and automatic 
SSI-based Medi-Cal. A new eligibility determination based on a non-institutional 
living arrangement is required prior to the person being discharged either to the 
home of hislher spouse or parents or to a community setting to ensure continuing 
Medi-Cal eligibility and receipt of waiver services. NOTE: Some people may not lose 
Medi-Cal, may not have a share of cost or will continue on SSI and SSI-based Medi- 
cal upon returning home because the family incomelproperty is below the Medi-cal 
or SSI limit. Persons who continue to be or are eligible for SSI or qualify for a zero 
SOC Medi-Cal because the family incomelproperty is below the limit do not need to 
be determined using special eligibility rules for the HCBS, MSSP, or DDS waivers. 
B. County Contact 
Each county shall designate a waiver contact person. The county waiver contact person will 
receive the request for a Medi-Cal eligibility determination from the referring agency, 
coordinate the Medi-Cal eligibility determination, and answer questions about the program 
even though the actual determination may be made by other county staff. The contact for 
each county is attached to these procedures. It is important that applicants be directed to 
the county contacts because they understand how to process those waivers that disregard 
parental income and resources and apply spousal impoverishment rules. Once the county 
receives a referral, the county will determine Medi-Cal eligibility based on the criteria for the 
appropriate waiver including the living arrangement covered by the waiver. 
I 
111. WAIVERS TYPES 
There are four types of waivers that are discussed in these Procedures. The first three may have 
special Medi-Cal eligibility determination requirements if the applicant is referred to the county by the 
designated agency. The last one currently follows regular eligibility rules. Note: The Model Waiver 
has been terminated and two new nursing facility waivers have been approved for persons eligible for 
SECTION NO.: 51346 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 291 DATE109/03/04 19D-3

[page 10]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
Level A and B and sub-acute care. The In-Home Medical Care waiver has been approved for 
persons eligible for acute hospital level of care. All three of these waivers are now referred to as the 
Medi-Cal In-Home Operations (IHO) Waivers. 
A. Department of Developmental Services Home and Community-Based (DDS) Waiver 
B. Medi-Cal In-Home Operations (IHO) Waivers - Nursing Facility (NF) AIB Waiver, NF Subacute 
Waiver and In-Home Medical Care Services (IHMC) Waiver 
C. Multipurpose Senior Services Program (MSSP) Waiver 
D. Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome (AIDS) Waiver 
IV. DESCRIPTION AND PROCESSING 
A. Department of Developmental Services (DDS) Home and Community-Based Services 
(HCBS) Waiver 
1. Description 
The DDS HCBS waiver offers services to individuals with developmental disabilities 
who live at home and meet the level of care criteria for certain intermediate care 
facilities for the developmentally disabled as defined in the California Health and 
Safety Code. Waiver eligibility will be determined by the regional centers, but 
counties are responsible for the Medi-Cal determination. Services provided include 
homemaker, home health aide services, habilitation, residential habilitation, day 
habilitation, prevocational services, supported employment services, environmental 
accessibility adaptations, skilled nursing, transportation, specialized medical 
equipment and supplies, respite care, chore services, personal emergency response 
systems, family training, adult residential care, adult foster care, assisted living, 
supported living services, vehicle adaptations, communication aides, crisis 
intervention, crisis intervention facility services, mobile crisis intervention, nutritional 
consultation, and behavior intervention services. 
2. Referring Agency: Department of Developmental Services (DDS) - Regional Centers 
DDS administers the DDS HCBS Waiver as delegated by DHS in accordance with 
the interagency agreement. DDS in turn contracts with twenty-one private, not for 
profit, regional centers which are responsible under state law for coordinating, 
providing, arranging or purchasing all services needed for eligible individuals with 
developmental disabilities in California. The regional center will determine whether 
the applicant is eligible to participate in the waiver program by reviewing the 
applicant's medical, social, and developmental care needs. Once waiver eligibility is 
determined, the regional center will refer himlher to the county for a Medi-Cal 
eligibility determination or redetermination via the Department of Developmental 
Services Waiver Referral form (DHS 7096). The regional center may act on the 
applicant's behalf if helshe cannot act for himlher self or the individual's financially 
responsible family member can act on hislher behalf. Counties may share ongoing 
eligibility information with the regional centers regardless of who acts on the client's 
behalf. See the attached list for the name and address titled "Contacts for Regional 
Centers*. 
SECTION NO.: 51346 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 29 1 DATE: 09/03/04 19D-4

[page 11]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
3. Eligibility Requirements 
The individual must be eligible for full scoDe benefits and meet all regular Medi-Cal 
eligibility rules such as California residency when determining eligibility for the 
waiver. 
If the individual is eligible for Medi-Cal with no SOC, counties should not use 
the special waiver rules or report the individual to MEDS using the waiver aid 
codes. The county should contact the regional center and inform the contact 
that the waiver is not appropriate. However, if after a preliminary screening, it 
appears that the applicant will be property ineligible or has a SOC using 
parental or spousal income and property, the special rules below apply: 
The applicant is treated as if helshe were institutionalized for purposes of the 
treatment of income and resources. If the applicant is an adult, spousal 
impoverishment rules apply. If the applicant is a child, parental income and 
resources are not considered even though the child lives in the home. 
A second vehicle is exempt if the vehicle has been modified to accommodate 
the physical handicap(s) or medical needs of the individual. Verification shall be 
by the physician's written statement of necessity. 
The individual is in hislher own MFBU. If other family members wish to be 
aided, the individual is treated similar to those on public assistance (PA), e.g., 
the individual may be used to link other family members although the individual 
is not in the family's MFBU. 
The waiver is limited to those who are eligible with or without a share of cost and 
are eligible for full benefits. A person residing in a nursing home under the state- 
only aid code of 53, a person in another limited scope aid code, or a person who 
does not have satisfactory immigration status is not eligible. 
The county should use the most beneficial full scope Medi-Cal program to 
determine eligibility that is applicable to the applicant, e.g., the Aged and 
Disabled program, the Medically Needy program (MN), the Medically Indigent 
(MI) program, or the Percent programs. Eligibility is based on the waiver 
individual's own income and resources, including amounts remaining after 
spousal impoverishment rules are applied. The maintenance need is based on 
the income limit of the appropriate program used to determine eligibility rather 
than the $35 personal needs allowance. 
For example: A child under age 19 who has a SOC in the MN or MI program or 
excess property may be eligible under the appropriate Percent program which 
disregards property using a family size of one. Helshe would then be reported to 
MEDS using the appropriate waiver aid code. 
A disability determination is not required unless (1) eligibility is based on a Medi- 
cal program requiring that the individual be disabled, (2) the individual has no 
other basis for linkage or, (3) there would be an advantage if the applicant were 
disabled, e.g., income deductions available only to the disabled. This 
SECTION NO.: 51346 MANUAL LETTER ~0.:291 ~~~~fl9/03/04 19D-5

[page 12]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
determination of disability may be advantageous in the future when the child 
becomes an adult. 
Aid codes for the DDS Waiver are: 
6V No SOC 6W SOC 
In some counties, persons in 6V may choose to be in a managed care plan. It is 
not mandatory unless the person resides in a county that has a County 
Organized Health System. 
B. Medi-Cal In-Home Operations (IHO) Waiver 
1. Description 
These waivers are limited to persons who in the absence of the waiver program would 
otherwise require the nursing facility level A or B level of care for at least 365 consecutive 
days or sub-acute services for at least 180 consecutive days or acute hospital level of 
care (IHMC Waiver) for 90 consecutive days but who wish to live at home or in the 
community. Individuals under the age of 21 must be able to access a waiver service that 
is not covered under the EPSDT program. Inpatient status prior to the enrollment of 
waiver services is no longer required. Services provided include but are not limited to: 
case management, private duty nursing, home health aides, family training, waiver 
personal care (except for the IHMC Waiver) and adaptations to the home. 
2. Referring Agency: DHS In-Home Operations (IHO) 
The purpose of IHO is to ensure that necessary, appropriate, and quality medical and 
nursing services are authorized and provided in the home setting. IHO staff will facilitate 
the proposal documentation and development between each waiver participant and 
provider. This process allows for review of all issues related to the recipient level of care, 
evaluation of durable medical equipment, available waiver services, cost-effectiveness, 
and verification by IHO staff that the home environment is appropriate to meet the health 
and safety needs of the recipient. Final approvals of individual waiver requests are 
subject to review by a Medi-Cal Nurse Evaluator, Medi-Cal Medical Consultant, and other 
staff. 
3. Referral Process 
When the medical necessity determination has been completed, the county will receive a 
copy of the Medi-Cal HCBS Waiver Eligibility Notice. The county should contact the IHO 
eligibility liaison for the date of eligibility if the medical necessity determination has already 
been completed and the date is not stated. If the applicant is determined to be ineligible 
for any reason, the county should also inform the IHO eligibility liaison. For more 
information, counties may contact the following: 
Department of Health Services 
In-Home Operations, Intake Unit 
Mail Station 4502, P.O. Box 997419 
Sacramento, CA 95899-741 9 
(916) 552-9105 
SECTION NO.: 51346 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 291 DATE:O~/O~/~~ 19D-6

[page 13]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
4. Eligibility Requirements 
The Medi-Cal HCBS waiver has the same Medi-Cal eligibility rules as the DDS 
waiver. IHO will do some prescreening of income and property prior to referring the 
individual to the county. 
The individual must meet all standard Medi-Cal eligibility rules such as California 
residency and cooperation when determining eligibility for the waiver. 
If the individual is eligible for Medi-Cal with no SOC without using the special 
waiver rules, helshe is not eligible for the waiver. The county should contact 
IHO and inform the contact that the waiver is not appropriate. However, if after 
a preliminary screening, it appears that the applicant will be property ineligible 
or has a SOC using parental or spousal income and property, the special rules 
below apply: 
The applicant is treated as if helshe were institutionalized for purposes of the 
treatment of income and resources. If the applicant is an adult, spousal 
impoverishment rules apply. If the applicant is a child, parental income and 
resources are not considered even though the child lives in the home. 
A second vehicle is exempt if the vehicle has been modified to accommodate 
the physical handicap(s) or medical needs of the individual. Verification shall be 
by the physician's written statement of necessity. 
The individual is in histher own MFBU. If other family members wish to be 
aided, the individual is treated similar to those on public assistance (PA), e.g., 
the individual may be used to link other family members although the individual 
is not in the family's MFBU. 
The waiver is limited to those who are eligible with or without a share of cost and 
are eligible for full benefits. A person residing in a nursing home under the state- 
only aid code of 53, a person in another limited scope aid code, or a person who 
does not have satisfactory immigration status is not eligible. 
The county should use the most beneficial full scope Medi-Cal program to 
determine eligibility that is applicable to the applicant, e.g., the Aged and 
Disabled program, the Medically Needy program (MN), the Medically Indigent 
(MI) program, or the Percent programs. Eligibility is based on the waiver 
individual's own income and resources, including amounts remaining after 
spousal impoverishment rules are applied. The maintenance need is based on 
the income limit of the appropriate program used to determine eligibility rather 
than the $35 personal needs allowance. 
For example: A child under age 19 who has a SOC in the MN or MI program or 
excess property may be eligible under the appropriate Percent program which 
disregards property using a family size of one. Helshe would then be reported to 
MEDS using the appropriate waiver aid code. 
- - 
SECTION NO.: 51346 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 291 DATE~~/~~/o~ 19D-7

[page 14]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
A disability determination is not required unless (1) eligibility is based on a Medi- 
cal program requiring that the individual be disabled, (2) the individual has no 
other basis for linkage or, (3) there would be an advantage if the applicant were 
disabled, e.g., income deductions available only to the disabled. This 
determination of disability may be advantageous in the future when the child 
becomes an adult. 
Aid Codes for the Medi-Cal IHO Waiver are: 
6X IHO Waiver No SOC 6Y IHO Waiver SOC 
In some counties, persons in 6X may choose to be in a managed care plan. It is not 
mandatory unless the person resides in a county that has a County Organized Health 
System. 
C. Department of Aging Multipurpose Senior Services Program (MSSP) Waiver 
1. Description 
The MSSP waiver program is limited to the frail elderly who are over sixty-five years of age 
and receive Medi-Cal under an appropriate aid code. MSSP clients reside in their own homes 
within a particular service area. Potential clients are screened for eligibilityas to Level of Care 
(LOC) Determination and must be certifiable for placement in a nursing facility. Clients have 
to be appropriate for care management services and be able to be served within MSSP's 
cost limitations. 
An amendment to this waiver was approved by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid 
Services. Effective June 1, 2003, the new amendment will allow MSSP to bill Medi-Cal for 
transitional services that were provided during the last six months of a Medi-Cal individual's 
institutional stay. These services must be to support the de-institutionalization of a Medi-Cal 
individual and are billed once the individual leaves the institution. The new amendment also 
will now allow the county to determine eligibility using institutional deeming rules (spousal 
impoverishment) for a person who moves from the institution and returns home to hislher 
spouse or for a person who is already living at home with his or her spouse. The number of 
persons eligible under this provision is limited to five percent of the total waiver clients or 
about 816 persons state wide. The MSSP will be responsible for ensuring this limit is not 
exceeded. 
MSSP provides interdisciplinary care management services including the coordination and 
use of existing community resources. Care managers initiate and oversee the process of 
assessments, care plan development, service arrangement, ongoing monitoring and 
reassessments of a client's needs. To arrange for services, care management staff must 
first explore support that might be available through family, friends, and the volunteer 
community. They then review existing publicly funded services and make direct referrals 
whenever possible. If needed services are not available through these resources, the care 
management team can authorize the purchase of some services from MSSP funds. 
Services that may be purchased under the waiver include: health care (skilled nursing); adult 
social day care; housing assistance; chore and personal care; respite; transportation; meal 
services; protective services; and special communication services. Referrals to the program 
come from a variety of sources including, but not limited to, local county agencies, social 
service and aging organizations, hospitals, home care agencies, and a variety of other 
community-based groups. 
SECTION NO.: 51346 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 291 DATE: 09/03/04 19D-8

[page 15]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
2. Referring Agency: California Department of Aging (CDA) 
CDA has an interagency agreement with the Department of Health Services (DHS) to 
operate the MSSP Waiver. Within CDA, the MSSP Section of the Medi-Cal Services 
Branch is the unit responsible for reviewing and monitoring the program. CDA contracts 
with either public entities or private nonprofit agencies (MSSP sites) to run the program at 
the local level. CDA is responsible for oversight of these contracts. The local MSSP sites 
will determine the medical appropriateness of waiver coverage before referral to the 
county by reviewing the applicant's health and psychosocial needs and functional status. 
If appropriate, the MSSP site will refer him or her to the county for an eligibility 
determination or redetermination via the MSSP Waiver Referral form. Counties may 
share ongoing eligibility information with the local MSSP sites. Each site has identified a 
staff person to liaison with the county. Persons inquiring about the MSSP program should 
be referred to the appropriate agency on the Roster and contact list; however, only those 
persons who live within the boundaries of the sites may be eligible for MSSP services. 
There are some locations that are not within the boundaries of an agency at this time. 
Counties should phone the nearest contact person for more information. 
3. Eligibility 
Individuals who are Medi-Cal eligible using regular income and property rules (including 
spousal impoverishment if they are institutionalized and have community spouses) and who 
need MSSP services are evaluated by the MSSP program to determine whether they meet 
the MSSP criteria. These individuals may currently be in a nursing facility and wish to return 
to the home of their spouse or are already living at home with their spouse. Counties will not 
receive a waiver referral for individuals who are already eligible for Medi-Cal without an SOC 
and are currently receiving MSSP services unless they have a change in circumstances. In 
addition, some individuals are eligible for MSSP services who have an SOC (after spousal 
impoverishment rules are applied) if they also have a secondary Personal Care Services 
Program (PCSP) tracking aid code. (The SOC is certified as met at the beginning of the 
month based on the beneficiary's projected costs for his or her PCSP services.) If the person 
is not eligible for the PCSP secondary aid code, helshe is not eligible for the MSSP waiver 
and should not be reported to MEDS with only the MSSP SOC aid code. 
When the county contact person receives an MSSP referral form for a married applicant 
or beneficiary and the county determines that the individual will be property ineligible or 
has an SOC using regular rules, the waiver allows institutional deeming rules to apply 
(similar to the special eligibility rules for the DDS and HCBS waivers). The Medi-Cal 
MSSP eligibility determination is as follows: 
The applicantlbeneficiary is treated as if he or she were institutionalized for purposes of 
the treatment of income and resources. 
Spousal impoverishment rules apply. 
A second vehicle is exempt if the vehicle has been modified to accommodate the physical 
handicap(s) or medical needs of the individual. Verification shall be by the physician's written 
statement of necessity. 
The MSSP individual is in hislher own Medi-Cal Family Budget Unit (MFBU). If other 
family members wish to be aided, the individual is treated similar to those on public 
SECTION NO.: 51346 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 2 9 1 DATE: 09/03/04 19D-9

[page 16]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
assistance, e.g., the individual may be used to link other family members although the 
individual is not in the family's MFBU. 
w The MSSP individual must be eligible for fulr benefits with or without an SOC. 
NOTE: A person residing in a nursing home under the limited state-only Aid Code of 53, 
a person in another limited-scope aid code, or a person who does not have satisfactory 
immigration status is not eligible. 
w The county should use the most beneficial full-scope Medi-Cal program to determine 
eligibility that is applicable to the applicant, e.g., Pickle, the Aged and Disabled program, 
the Medically Needy (MN) program. Eligibility is based on the individual's own income 
and resources, including amounts remaining after spousal impoverishment rules are 
applied. 
Example A 
John is a 70 year old applicant who is referred to the county by the MSSP site. He is 
living at home with his spouse. They have no minor children living in the home. The 
county determines that he is property eligible, but is not eligible for the Aged and Disabled 
Federal Poverty Level Program and would have an SOC as an MN person. The county 
then applies spousal impoverishment rules after certain deductions from his gross 
income. John may allocate the lesser of the maximum spousal income allocation to his 
spouse or up to her limit for the spouse at home. His monthly SOC is based on the 
remaining amount of his income. The county identifies him on the Medi-Cal Eligibility 
Data System with the appropriate new MSSP waiver aid code 1Y and the PCSP aid code 
of 1 F (after confirming that he is eligible for PCSP services and will meet his SOC at the 
beginning of each month using PCSP services). 
Example B 
Tom is 65 years old and currently eligible in the MN program with a monthly SOC of 
$1,000. The county receives a referral by the MSSP site. He is living at home with his 
spouse. There are no minor children in the home. The county applies spousal 
impoverishment rules and his SOC is reduced to zero (1X aid code). 
Example C 
Paul is 80 years old and referred to the county by the MSSP'S~~~. He is living at home 
with his spouse and there are no minor children in the home. The county determines he 
is property ineligible for any Medi-Cal program and his own income is below the MN limit. 
The county then applies spousal impoverishment rules and finds him to be property 
eligible. Since his income is already below the MN limit, there is no need to allocate any 
of his income to the spouse (AX aid code). 
4. New Aid Codes 
Aid codes for individuals qualifying for the MSSP waiver under these special institutional 
deeming rules are: 
1X MSSP No SOC IY MSSP SOC (Must also be reported with IF) 
SECTION NO.: 51346 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 2 9 1 DATE: 09/03/04 190-10

[page 17]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
 
 
 
 
 
SECTION NO. : 51346      MANUAL LETTER NO.: 307     DATE: 12/10/09        19D-11.0 
                                       In some counties, persons in 1X may choose to be in a managed 
care plan.  It is not mandatory unless the person resides in a county that has a County 
Organized Health System. 
 
D. Assisted Living Waiver   
 
Assisted living provides a viable alternative to long-term care for certain individuals 
because it allows individuals to live in the community while receiving many of the 
services that would be available in long-term care.  
 
The Department of Health Care Services (DHCS) applied for and received federal 
approval from the federal Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) for an 
Assisted Living (AL) waiver.  Approval was received in May 2005, with implementation 
of the waiver to run from January 1, 2006 through December 31, 2008.  
  
During the January 2006-December 2008 period, the AL waiver operated as a pilot 
project with up to 1000 slots for enrollment.  At the conclusion of this initial period, the 
pilot ended, but the waiver continues with federal approval for the waiver’s renewal, but 
with more counties participating. During th e pilot, three counties (Sacramento, Los 
Angeles, and San Joaquin) had facilities that have agreed to participate in the pilot.  This 
meant these facilities met the criteria for AL waiver participation and accepted the 
conditions for pilot participation.  
 
As mentioned above, as the waiver progresses, facilities in other counties will be added 
and slots for enrollment will be increased.  Counties are not responsible for monitoring 
enrollment numbers.  The enrollment of individuals is  the responsibility of the DHCS. If 
enrollment maximums have been reached, DHCS,  rather than the counties, will inform 
the waiver applicant that the waiver’s enrollment is closed.  
 
There will be instances when one county’s Medi-Cal resident will want to enroll in the 
AL waiver and will then move to an AL waiver provider site in another county.  If the 
assisted living provider site is in another county, the current county of residence will 
determine whether an intercounty transfer is  appropriate in addition to conducting any 
necessary Medi-Cal eligibility determinations for that resident.  In some situations, an 
intercounty transfer is not needed, for example, when a married individual with a spouse 
on Medi-Cal will remain the responsibility of the county where the couple resided before 
one spouse’s move to LTC or assisted living.   
 
Note:  Any reference in these Procedures to “regular” Medi-Cal means that the county 
conducted an eligibility determ ination without applying any of the specific AL waiver 
rules.  
 
1. Description 
 
State law ( Welfare and Institutions Code  14132.26 as added  by Assembly Bill 499 
(Chapter 557 Statutes of 2000) created the Assisted Living Waiver Pilot Project

[page 18]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
 
 
 
 
 
SECTION NO. : 51346      MANUAL LETTER NO.: 307     DATE: 12/10/09        19D-11.1 
(ALWPP) to test the efficacy of assisted  living as a Medi-Cal benefit and as an 
alternative to long-term nursing provider site placement.   
 
The AL waiver will test the assisted living benefit in two settings.   
 
▪ Residential care facilities for the elderly (RCFEs) and 
▪ Publicly funded senior and/or disabled housing (PSH).   
 
As described in paragraph five of item D above, individuals from any county may request 
enrollment into this waiver if they are willing to move to an AL waiver provider site in a 
another county. Therefore, any county may be required to make a Medi-Cal eligibility 
determination using AL waiver eligibility rul es for a waiver applicant who resides in its 
county but who, if enrolled in the AL waiver ,  will move to another county where an AL 
waiver facility is located.  
 
Regular Medi-Cal rules for determining which county is responsible for the eligibility 
determination apply.  Generally, the county of  responsibility is the county of residence of 
the individual.  An individual does not have to  initially reside in the county where the AL 
waiver provider site is located in order to  request enrollment into  the waiver, but the 
individual must be willing to move to that provider site if enrolled.  
 
Medi-Cal eligible persons residing in an AL waiver provider site and enrolled into the AL 
waiver have the following characteristics: 
 
 Have full scope Medi-Cal eligibility without a Medi-Cal share-of-cost;  
 Have enough disposable income as described in section 3a, step 4;  
 Are aged or disabled; (Note:  Blind app licants for the AL waiver will need to 
be determined disabled to be part of this waiver.)  
 Meet the nursing facility (NF) A or B level of care; and  
 Are at least 21 years of age.  
 
A person residing in a nursing facility unde r the state-only aid code 53, a person in 
another limited scope aid code, an individual w ho is limited scope due to alien status or 
due to failure to meet Deficit Reduction Act (DRA) requirements for verifying identity or 
citizenship cannot be in the waiver.  Individu als also must meet all standard Medi-Cal 
eligibility requirements such as California residency and cooperation to be eligible for the 
waiver.  Because an individual must have enough disposable income to provide for the 
cost of assisted living, all individuals in the AL waiver will have no share-of-cost Medi-
Cal.   
 
Eligibility is restricted to one Home and Community Based Service (HCBS) waiver at a 
time – concurrent enrollment in another HCBS waiver is not allowed. 
 
The AL waiver benefits include:  
 
 Assisted living benefit as rendered by the RCFE setting

[page 19]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
 
 
 
 
 
SECTION NO. : 51346      MANUAL LETTER NO.: 307     DATE: 12/10/09        19D-11.2 
 Assisted living benefit as rendered by a Medi-Cal licensed and certified 
home health agency in the PSH setting 
 Care coordination 
 
2. Referring Agency:  
 
The waiver is operated directly by the DHCS Long-Term Care Division, Monitoring and 
Oversight Section (MOS). The MOS provides the federal Centers for Medicare and 
Medicaid Services (CMS) with the assurances that necessary, appropriate, and quality 
care and other assisted living services are rendered as described in the wavier 
application.  DHCS has also contracted w ith Care Coordinator Agencies (CCAs) to 
conduct some aspects of the AL waiver process.  Current lists of CCAs are contained in 
the following website:  www.californiaassistedliving.org.  This website also contains 
information about the AL waiver. 
 
3. Referral Process: 
 
This section describes the referral process and although this section addresses AL waiver 
eligibility determinations, details about how these AL de terminations are made are 
contained in Section 4, “Eligibility Requirements under the AL Waiver”.  The referral 
form addressed below is contained in these Procedures.     
 
A. Initial Enrollment Process 
 
 Step 1.  Individuals who ask DHCS, a CCA, or AL waiver facilities about 
enrolling in the AL waiver must be eligible for full scope  Medi-Cal (with or 
without a share-of-cost) before any AL  waiver assessments are made by DHCS 
or CCAs.  For purposes of these Procedures, any reference to Medi-Cal or   
Medi-Cal eligibility assumes that the individual is or will be eligible for full 
scope Medi-Cal. 
 
If an individual is already on Medi-Cal, th e individual will be referred to a Care 
Coordinator Agency (CCA) who works on behalf of the DHCS by conducting 
level of care assessments.   If an individual is not already a Medi-Cal beneficiary, 
he/she will be advised to apply for Medi-Cal at his/her county of residence and to 
then provide a CCA with the results of that determination.  
 
If a county becomes aware of an applicant or beneficiary who wants information 
about the AL waiver, the county should refer the individual to a CCA (see the 
website listed in paragraph 2 above for names of CCAs) and for an applicant, 
must continue to complete the regular Medi-Cal determination.   
 
 Step 2.  CCAs conduct the level of care  assessment for individuals who already 
have had a Medi-Cal determination that r esulted in either coverage for full scope 
Medi-Cal (with or without a share-of-cost) or if married, a denial due to excess 
property.  No level of care assessments are made for any others who are 
ineligible for Medi-Cal or who have not yet had a regular Medi-Cal

[page 20]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
 
 
 
 
 
SECTION NO. : 51346      MANUAL LETTER NO.: 307     DATE: 12/10/09        19D-11.3 
determination. (Those married individu als who are ineligible due to excess 
property may turn out to be Medi-Cal eligible under the waiver once AL waiver 
rules are applied, so the level of care assessment is made.)  Note:  Such married 
individuals who would be Medi-Cal elig ible once AL waiver rules are applied 
still must meet the AL Waiver requirement of being eligible for full scope no 
share of cost Medi-Cal. CCAs provide the results of the assessment to the MOS.   
 
 Step 3.  MOS staff review the results of the level of care assessments.   
  
(a) If the level of care criteria is not met for an individual, MOS informs the 
individual that he/she is not eligible fo r the waiver.  There is no referral to 
any county.  The AL waiver process stops.  
 
(b) If level of care criteria is met, MOS staff will review what kind of  
Medi-Cal the individual has and takes the appropriate action described 
below.   
 
(i) If the individual is eligible for regular Medi-Cal without a share-of-cost 
based on receipt of SSI/SSP, MOS will enroll the individual directly into 
the waiver and inform the family or CCA to inform the Social Security 
Administration of the date of the individual’s entry into assisted living.  
There is no referral to any county.  
 
(ii) If the individual is not on SSI/SSP, but is eligible for regular Medi-Cal 
without a share-of-cost, MOS will continue with step 4.    
 
(iii) If the individual is eligible for Medi-Cal with a share-of-cost or the 
individual is married and ineligible for Medi-Cal due to excess property, 
MOS will continue with step 4. 
 
 Step 4.  Because the individual met the leve l of care criteria, he/she is potentially 
eligible for AL waiver enrollment but he /she must be eligible for Medi-Cal as 
previously determined by the county and have enough disposable income to meet 
the costs of the AL Waiver.  DHCS, not the counties, will make the 
determination as to whether an individual has enough disposable income to meet 
the costs of the AL waiver based on information such as whether the individual is 
on SSI/SSP, what the individual’s notice of action contains, and what 
information the county supplies on the Assisted Living Waiver Referral form, 
discussed in step 5 below.  On May 1, 2009, this amount is $1086 which is the 
same amount as the SSI/SSP maximum total payment level for nonmedical board 
and care and includes a personal and incidental needs rate of $125.  Note:  This 
amount is subject to change, sometimes mo re frequently than annually.  If there 
is such a change, it will be published via an All County Welfare Directors Letter 
as an update to the Pickle program handbook entitled, “SSI/SSP Section 16 
Payment Standards”.

[page 21]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
 
 
 
 
 
SECTION NO. : 51346      MANUAL LETTER NO.: 307     DATE: 12/10/09        19D-11.4 
 
Frequently, DHCS/CCAs will refer indi viduals to the county for another 
eligibility determination that is to be ba sed on the assumption that the individual 
is to be enrolled in the AL waiver and will move to an AL waiver facility.  For 
example, there will be some individuals who under regular Medi-Cal have a 
share-of-cost but could become zero share-of-cost and have increased disposable 
income under a regular Medi-Cal determination if they were to move to a 
licensed board and care provider site and have the excess board and care or Petit 
v. Bonta board and care deduction applied.  
 
In addition, because the waiver has sp ecial eligibility provisions as explained 
later, some individuals who are married, but who have excess property, may be 
property eligible and thus eligible for Medi-Cal with or without a share-of-cost 
when these waiver provisions are applied in the eligibility determination. 
 
Therefore, individuals who meet the level of care criteria and who have a share-
of-cost or if married, are ineligible due to excess property will be referred back to 
the county for an AL waiver eligibility determination.  MOS will use the AL 
waiver referral form listed in item 31 Sec tion 19 D VI that has been developed to 
request that the county welfare departme nt’s waiver coordinator conduct another 
eligibility determination.   
 
 Step 5.  The county will complete an AL  waiver eligibility determination for the 
referred individual by determining his/her potential Medi-Cal eligibility/share-of-
cost as if the individual were residing in a licensed board and care provider site. 
Depending on the circumstances of the case, the county may be using regular 
Medi-Cal rules with a board and care deduction or may be using AL waiver 
provisions. If the referred individual is already a Medi-Cal beneficiary, the 
county will need to redetermine the individual’s potential Medi-Cal 
eligibility/share-of-cost as if he/she we re residing in a licensed board and care 
provider site unless the county already made  a determination based on this living 
arrangement.  See “Eligibility Requirements under the AL Waiver” below for 
detailed instructions on making this determination under AL waiver rules.  
 
The county shall complete the section of the AL waiver referral form dealing 
with potential Medi-Cal eligibility/share-of-cost and return it to the DHCS MOS 
by mail, fax or email.   
 
Important:  Because MOS will need to determine whether an individual has 
sufficient disposable income to enroll in the AL waiver, the county must include 
the net nonexempt income calculation on the referral form. 
 
 Step 6.  If the individual would be eligible for Medi-Cal based on enrollment into 
the AL waiver, MOS will again determine whether the individual has sufficient 
disposable income to be enrolled into the waiver based on the county’s no share-
of-cost/share-of-cost determination.  If th e individual is ineligible due to excess

[page 22]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
 
 
 
 
 
SECTION NO. : 51346      MANUAL LETTER NO.: 307     DATE: 12/10/09        19D-11.5 
property even after AL waiver rules are applied, MOS will not enroll the 
individual because he/she is not Medi-Cal eligible.      
 
(a).  If MOS determines that the indivi dual is to be enrolled in the waiver, the 
MOS and the individual will determine the date of the individual’s 
enrollment and when he/she will enter an AL waiver provider site.  MOS 
will provide this information to the county via the referral form.  The 
county will make any needed changes to eligibility based on this 
information, will report any eligibility changes as of the first of the month 
of residence in the AL provider site, and will issue an appropriate AL 
waiver approval notice of action, e.g., if there are changes to the 
individual’s current Medi-Cal eligibility that was determined under regular 
Medi-Cal rules.     
 
(b). If MOS determines that the individual is not going to be enrolled in the AL 
waiver, MOS will inform the individual and will also provide the county 
with the reason.  If the reason is based on a county determination of 
ineligibility due to excess property or insufficient disposable income based 
on the county’s determination of ne t nonexempt income, the county must 
provide a notice of action stating that the individual is not eligible for the 
AL waiver and must include the income/property determination as 
appropriate, even if there are no changes to the individual’s current regular 
Medi-Cal eligibility.  Please see Section 6 Notices of Action for more 
information.  
 
B. Ongoing process  
 
If an individual’s enrollment in the AL waiver is to end, the MOS will send this 
information to the county via the refe rral form.  The county will need to 
redetermine Medi-Cal for the individual without applying waiver provisions.  
The county may also need to determine whether the individual will remain living 
in an assisted living provider site in making this determination.   
 
If, at any time, the county determines that  an individual’s eligibility has changed, 
the county must provide this informati on to MOS via the referral form.  For 
example, if an individual in the waiver  has benefits reduced from full scope to 
limited scope due to DRA requirements,  the county must notify MOS via the 
referral form of this change.  MOS will in form the individual that he/she is no 
longer eligible for the waiver.   
 
4. Eligibility Requirements under AL Waiver rules 
 
At this point in the process, the county should already have completed a regular 
Medi-Cal determination of ineligibility or eligibility with or without a share-of-
cost.  The purpose of a new eligibility determination is to see whether an 
individual who is likely to enroll in the AL waiver and who has a share-of-cost or 
if married is ineligible due to excess  property under regular Medi-Cal would be

[page 23]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
 
 
 
 
 
SECTION NO. : 51346      MANUAL LETTER NO.: 307     DATE: 12/10/09        19D-11.6 
eligible for Medi-Cal without a share- of-cost based on potential enrollment into 
the AL waiver and a move to an AL waiver provider site.    
 
Either one or two eligibility determinations  will have to be made.  That is, first 
using the hierarchy applicable in determining eligibility for regular Medi-Cal, the 
county shall determine whether the individua l is eligible for a no share-of-cost 
full scope Medi-Cal program using regular Medi-Cal rules with the assumption 
that the individual will be living in an AL waiver provider site.  At this stage of 
the eligibility determination, the potential  waiver individual is not considered 
institutionalized nor do spousal impoverishment rules apply if he/she is married. 
If there is no share-of-cost eligibility, the county will report the waiver individual 
in that program’s aid code as of the first of the month in which he/she moves to 
the AL waiver provider site.  Then,  if there is no eligibility for a no share-of-cost 
program using regular Medi-Cal rules, the county will redetermine eligibility 
using the AL waiver rules described below as appropriate.   
 
The following AL waiver provisions apply in this AL eligibility determination.   
 
(a) The applicant is treated as if he/s he were institutionalized for purposes of 
deeming and determining the amount of  income and property the waiver 
applicant has.  This means the following:   
 
1. The individual is in his/her own MF BU.  If other family members wish 
to be aided, the waiver individual is still treated similarly to a family 
member not living in the home.    
 
2. Only the individual’s own income an d property are used to determine 
his/her financial eligibility after the methodology specified in (b) and (c) 
below is applied.   
 
(b) Income methodology when applying institutional and spousal 
impoverishment rules. 
 
If the waiver individual is married, “nam e on the check” rule applies.  That 
is, the owner of the income is the one  named as its recipient.  Community 
income is equally divided between the spouses.  There is no deeming of 
income from the non-waiver spouse to the waiver spouse. 
        
(i) Apply the standard deductions applicable to an aged or disabled 
individual such as the $20 any income deduction.   
(ii) Deduct the greater of (1) the amount of unavailable income pursuant to 
Title 22,  Section 50515(a)(3) referred to as the “excess board and care 
deduction”) or (2) the $315 Petit v. Bonta  deduction for personal care 
services.    
 
Two Important Factors:

[page 24]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
 
 
 
 
 
SECTION NO. : 51346      MANUAL LETTER NO.: 307     DATE: 12/10/09        19D-11.7 
 Background:  According to Section 5051 5(a)(3), unavailable income includes 
that portion of monthly income of a medically needy person residing in a 
licensed board and care facility which is both:  (A) Paid to the facility for 
residential care and support and (B) In  excess of the appropriate maintenance 
need level in accordance with in Section 50603.  The AL eligibility 
determination at this point is only a potential determination – what would 
happen if an individual were enrolled in  the AL waiver and moved to an AL 
facility.  There are two issues.  First, no amount has actually been paid to the 
facility yet and secondly, some individuals are having their potential 
eligibility determined under programs other than the Medically Needy 
program. Therefore, the following provisions are to be used when applying 
Section 50515(a)(3).   
   
 The amount to be used as the amount paid to the licensed board and care 
facility is the AL facility rate as determined as follows. 
 
The SSI/SSP maximum total payment for nonmedical board and care is 
contained in Section 16-Payment Standards in the Pickle Handbook.  
 
Although the SSI/SSP maximum total payment level for nonmedical 
board and care is used by DHCS to determine whether an individual has 
enough disposable income to be enrolled in the AL waiver, this amount 
contains a personal and incidental needs rate. (For example, on  
May 1, 2009, the nonmedical board and care rate is $1086 and the 
personal and incidental needs rate ranges from a minimum of $125 to a 
maximum of $220.  
 
The personal and incidental needs rate is retained by the individual and is 
not paid to the facility  and is not included in determining the excess 
board and care deduction.  However, at this point in the income 
determination, it is not known whet her the individual will retain the 
minimum or maximum personal and incidental needs rate.  Therefore, for 
ease of administration, counties are to assume the waiver individual is 
retaining only the minimum personal and incidental needs allowance. For 
example, on May 1, 2009, the counti es would assume the individual will 
retain $125 for personal needs and incidentals.   
 
AL facility rate defined:  The difference between the SSI/SSP 
nonmedical board and care payment level and the minimum personal and 
incidental needs rate is defined for purposes of the AL waiver as the AL 
facility rate. Therefore, as of May 1, 2009, the AL facility rate to be used 
is $ 961 ($1086 - $125).     
 
 The deduction specified in Section 50515(a)(3) also applies (if it is 
greater than the Petit deduction) when determining income eligibility for 
the Aged and  Disabled FPL program.  In that situation, the excess board 
and care deduction would be the difference between the AL waiver

[page 25]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
 
 
 
 
 
SECTION NO. : 51346      MANUAL LETTER NO.: 307     DATE: 12/10/09        19D-11.8 
facility rate and the effective income standard for one for the A&D FPL 
program (the greater of 100 percent of the FPL plus $230 or the SSI/SSP 
payment standard).    
 
(iii)  Apply any applicable earned income deductions such as the $65 
 and ½. 
(iv) Deduct any health insurance premium payments. 
(v) Deduct court ordered child support or spousal support.  
(vi) Apply any deductions or disregards applicable to the specific   
program for which the individual is being evaluated, for 
example, the $230 disregard applicable in the Aged and Disabled 
FPL program.  Note that this $230 deduction is not applicable in 
the situation where the county is evaluating the individual for 
any program other than the Aged and Disabled FPL program. 
(vii) Deduct the regular income standard/maintenance need income 
level for the program for which the individual is being evaluated, 
(for example, on April 1, 2009, the income limit for the Aged 
and Disabled FPL program is $1133 (100 percent of the FPL 
plus the $230 standard disregard because it is greater than the 
SSI/SSP payment level for one.  
(viii) Deduct the amount pursuant to the spousal impoverishment 
provision for allocating income  to the community spouse or 
family member if applicable.  For example, the waiver individual 
may allocate the maximum spousal income allocation to the 
spouse up to the limit for the spouse at home or may allocate a 
lesser amount.   
 
If there is no remaining income, the individual is eligible for no 
share-of-cost Medi-Cal under AL waiver provisions and the 
individual would be reported in aid code 14 or 64 when the 
individual is enrolled in the AL wa iver and enters an AL waiver 
facility. 
 
(c)  Property methodology when applying institutional and spousal 
impoverishment rules 
 
There are no changes from the provisions applied in a regular Medi-Cal 
determination except that spousal im poverishment provisions for property 
apply.  The property of bot h spouses is treated just as if the waiver applicant 
were an institutionalized individual.  The non waiver spouse may retain the 
community spouse resource allowance which is the greatest of the following: 
 
 the standard amount 
 an amount established by fair hearing 
 an amount established by court order.

[page 26]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
 
 
 
 
 
SECTION NO. : 51346      MANUAL LETTER NO.: 307     DATE: 12/10/09        19D-11.9 
The spouse deemed to be institutiona lized can retain another $2000 of 
countable property.  The full spousal impoverishment process is contained in 
ACWDL 90-01, except that the transfer of property penalties contained in 
that letter do not apply to individuals in the AL waiver.  
 
(d) Disability Determination 
 
As stated in the description of the waiver, an individual must either be aged 
or disabled to be in this waiver. If an individual requests a disability 
determination or needs such a determination for waiver eligibility, counties 
must follow all applicable regulations and procedures to ensure that such a 
disability determination is made.  An individual determined to be 
presumptively disabled is disabled. 
 
5. Aid Codes 
 
Aid codes are being developed for this AL waiver to more easily identify AL 
waiver enrollees.  During the AL waiver pilot, an individual who was eligible for 
no share-of-cost Medi-Cal by using AL waiver rules and was enrolled in the 
waiver was placed in aid code 14 if aged or 64 if disabled.  Until the new aid 
codes are operational, counties shall report an individual who is eligible for no 
share-of-cost Medi-Cal by using AL waiver rules and is enrolled in the waiver in 
aid code 14 if aged or 64 if disabled.   
 
6. Notices of Action 
 
As described above, individuals wishing to  enroll into the AL waiver must have 
had a Medi-Cal determination using re gular Medi-Cal rules before being 
evaluated for enrollment into the AL waiv er by DHCS.  Such individuals would 
have then already received a regular Medi-Cal notice of action.   
 
If an individual is to move into an AL waiver provider site and is then eligible 
using regular Medi-Cal rules, the county shall use a regular Medi-Cal notice of 
action.  
 
However, if eligibility/ineligibility is b ased on use of special AL rules such as 
institutional deeming rules and spousal  impoverishment provisions,  two new 
notices of action have been developed that counties must use depending upon the 
circumstances of the case.   
 
These notices are listed in items 28 and 29 in 19 D VI  Forms, Notices and 
Brochures.  In addition, we have devel oped a third notice in the unlikely event 
that the county is determining initial Medi -Cal eligibility under AL waiver rules. 
Copies of the English version of these th ree notices are on pages 19 D 57.1, 19 D 
57.2, and 19 D 57.3.  Translations in the threshold languages (as they become 
available) will be on the DHCS website at 
http://www.dhcs.ca.gov/formsandpubs/forms/Pages/MCEBForms.aspx.

[page 27]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
 
 
 
 
 
SECTION NO. : 51346      MANUAL LETTER NO.: 307     DATE: 12/10/09        19D-11.10 
 
Note that individuals who do not meet screen ing criteria, level of care criteria, or 
do not have sufficient disposable income to  meet the costs of assisted living as 
determined by DHCS will be informed by the DHCS that they are not being 
enrolled into the waiver.   
 
7. Examples 
 
Example 1. 
 
An aged/disabled individual has just moved to an assisted living provider site that 
is also a licensed board and care provider site.  The facility is not an AL waiver 
facility and the facility costs are $900.    The individual wants to apply for the AL 
waiver because of the waiver services. He contacts a Care Coordinator Agency 
(CCA) that tells him he must first appl y for Medi-Cal.  He contacts his county 
department of social services for a regular Medi-Cal determination.   
 
The individual has never been on SSI so there is no Pickle determination. He has 
no property.  The county reviews his eligibility for the A&D FPL program. The 
county makes the following determination based on his gross income of $2281.  
Assume the effective income limit for the A&D FPL program is $1133.  Assume 
that the AL facility rate is $ 961. 
 
1.  The county first determines regul ar eligibility for the A&D FPL program 
while the individual is in the assisted living (licensed board and care) provider 
site.  Assume the effective income limit for the A&D FPL program is $1133. The 
excess board and care deduction pursuant to Title 22 Section 50515(a)(3) is $0 ($ 
900 facility rate - $1133).  The $315 Petit deduction is used in the A&D FPL 
income determination because it is the larger amount.  Note:  Although the A&D 
FPL program does not apply to an individual in long term care, the waiver 
individual is not actually in LTC so he/she may be evaluated for the A&D FPL 
program.  
 
Applicant’s income       $   2281 
A n y  i n c o m e  d e d u c t i o n        -        20 
          $   2261 
Disregard unavailable income pursuant to Petit    -     315 
Net nonexempt income       $   1946 
 
The applicant is ineligible for the A&D FPL program under regular rules because 
his/her net nonexempt income exceeds $1133.  Assume he is ineligible for all 
other no share-of-cost Medi-Cal programs but would have a share-of-cost under 
regular Medi-Cal rules. The county issues a regular Notice of Action that the 
individual provides to the CCA.  The CCA sends the referral notice to the county 
and requests an eligibility determination as if the individual were enrolled in the 
AL waiver and moved to an AL facility site.

[page 28]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
 
 
 
 
 
SECTION NO. : 51346      MANUAL LETTER NO.: 307     DATE: 12/10/09        19D-11.11 
2.  The county then considers his eligib ility as if he were in the AL waiver.  
Assume the AL facility rate is $961 ( $1086 - $125, the difference between the 
SSI/SSP nonmedical board and care payment level and the minimum personal 
and incidental needs rate). The county first considers his eligibility for no share-
of-cost programs, but he is ineligible . The county then considers him for the 
ABD-Medically Needy (ABD-MN) program as if he were in an AL facility.  
Note that the Petit deduction of $315 is less than the $361 deduction for 
unavailable income pursuant to Title 22 , Section 50515(a)(3) ($961 AL waiver 
facility rate-$600 MNIL). 
 
Applicant’s income $   2281
Any income deduction -       20
 $   2261
Disregard for unavailable income -     361
(Note that this income makes him ineligible for any no cost program $   1900
Maintenance Need Income Level -     600
Share-of-cost $   1300
 
Because the individual is unmarried, th ere are no AL waiver income provisions 
that would reduce his income and share-of-cost.  The county returns the AL 
referral form to DHCS/CCA with this information.  The CCA will screen the 
individual for the AL Waiver. We do not consider the share-of-cost amount 
available to meet costs of assisted living under the AL waiver (the SSI/SSP 
nonmedical board and care rate).  This means that the individual has only $981 
disposable income ($20 + $361 + $600) disposable income which is less than the 
SSI/SSP nonmedical board and care costs. The CCA/MOS staff informs the 
individual that he/she does not sufficient disposable income to meet the costs of 
assisted living under the waiver and that he/she will not be enrolled. The 
CCA/MOS staff also returns the referral form to the county with this information.  
The county sends the individual the notice of action “Denial of Enrollment in the 
Assisted Living Waiver and/or Medi-Cal”.    
 
Example 2.   
 
An aged/disabled husband wants to m ove from the home he and his wife are 
living in, to live in an assisted living pr ovider site that is also a licensed board 
and care provider site.  His spouse will remain in their home.  Neither is on 
Medi-Cal, but the husband wants to apply for the AL waiver and he contacts a 
CCA.  The wife does not want Medi-Cal.  The CCA tells the husband to apply 
for Medi-Cal and provide them the results.   
 
The husband applies for Medi-Cal and the county makes the determination based 
on the following. Assume the husband has $871 from Social Security and his 
wife has $1509 in her name.  The couple receives $820 income in both of their 
names. The county determines that the $820 is from community property and that 
the originating documentation does not specify an amount for each.  Therefore, 
the county divides the $820 equally between the spouses so each is considered to

[page 29]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
 
 
 
 
 
SECTION NO. : 51346      MANUAL LETTER NO.: 307     DATE: 12/10/09        19D-11.12 
have $410. The husband has $1281 of income and the wife has $1919.  They 
have $111,560 in community property.  The husband pays a $100 monthly 
conservator fee that meets Medi-Cal rules for such a deduction and an $81 health 
insurance premium.  
 
The county determines that he has neve r been on SSI/SSP so he would never be 
eligible for Pickle. Furthermore, he is not eligible for any Medi-Cal program due 
to excess property.  The county sends him a denial notice of action. The husband 
provides his notice of action to the CCA.  The CCA screens the individual.  
Assume he meets the screening criteria so  that the CCA sends the AL waiver 
referral form to the county asking for an eligibility determination using AL 
waiver rules as appropriate.   Assume the AL waiver facility rate is $961.  
 
The county then completes the husband’s  income and property determination 
using AL waiver rules based on the supposition that the husband will be moving 
to a licensed AL waiver board and care provider site. Note that if there had been 
eligibility using regular rules, the county would not have needed to apply AL 
waiver spousal impoverishment. Assume the effective A&D FPL income 
standard for one is $1133. The excess boa rd and care deduction is $0 ($961 AL 
waiver facility rate - $1133).  Therefore, the income determination includes the 
$315 disregard pursuant to the Petit deduction because it is larger.  
 
The husband is treated as if he were institutionalized for purposes of determining 
his own income and property so if the husband were treated as if he were in long-
term care, there would be no income deemed from the spouse at home.   
 
1.  Income eligibility/share-of-cost determination 
 
The county determines the husband’s inco me eligibility under AL waiver rules 
for the A&D FPL program.  Note:  Because the husband is treated as if he were 
institutionalized for determining his own income and there is no income deemed 
from the spouse, the AL waiver rules supersede the regular Medi-Cal rules and 
there is no deduction given for the mainte nance need income level of the spouse 
as there would be under regular Medi-Cal rules. Assume the Minimum Monthly 
Maintenance Need Allowance (MMMNA) is $2739.   The husband may allocate 
up to $820 to his wife ($2739 MMMNA - $1919, the wife’s income).      
 
Waiver applicant husband’s income  $   1281
Any income deduction  -       20
Unavailable income deducted pursuant to Petit  -     315
Amount deducted for conservator fee  -     100
Amount deducted for health insurance premium  -       81
Remainder  $     765
Allocation to wife pursuant to spousal impoverishment -      765
Net nonexempt income  $        0

[page 30]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
 
 
 
 
 
SECTION NO. : 51346      MANUAL LETTER NO.: 307     DATE: 12/10/09        19D-11.13 
The husband will meet the income requirement for the A&D FPL program using 
AL waiver rules once he moves to an AL waiver provider site because his 
income is less than $1133.  
 
2. Property determination: 
 
The county determines whether the husband meets the property limit of $2000 
for the A&D FPL program applying the spousal impoverishment provision 
allowed under the terms of the AL waiver.  The couple’s total property is 
$111,560.  Assume the community spouse resource allowance is $109,560 and 
the husband transferred $109,560 to his wife by the end of the CSRA transfer 
period. His remaining property would be $2000 and he meets the property limit. 
 
 The husband meets both the A&D FP L income limit and the property 
limit using AL waiver provisions.  He therefore is eligible for the A&D 
FPL program and eligible for no share-of-cost full scope Medi-Cal using 
AL waiver rules.  The county will return the AL referral form to the 
CCA with the income calculation and information that the husband will 
be eligible for Medi-Cal with no share-of-cost using AL waiver rules.   
 
The CCA determines that the husband does not have sufficient income to pay for 
assisted living under the AL waiver. If he continues paying the $100 conservator 
fee and the $81 health insurance premium, he would have $1100 ($1281-$181), 
but if he pays the $765 MMMNA, he would have only $335.  Assume the CCA 
discusses this with the husband and his family and the family agrees to pay the 
AL facility the difference between its AL facility rate and the amount the 
husband can pay the facility.  (Note: The husband will continue to get the 
MMMNA spousal allocation deduction even if his wife is the one who agreed to 
use her allocation to pay the facility because we do not monitor how a 
community spouse uses her income including the allocation.)  Assuming that the 
husband will be enrolled in the AL waiver, the CCA will inform the county of the 
husband’s enrollment into the AL waiver and his expected date of entry into 
assisted living.  The county provides the husband with the notice of action, 
“Approval of Enrollment in Assisted Living Waiver and Initial Medi-Cal ”. The 
county will report his eligibility under aid code 64 for that month.   
   
E. DHS Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome (AIDS) Waiver 
   
 1. Description  
 
The AIDS Medi-Cal Waiver Program (MCWP) is limited to persons with a 
symptomatic Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) or Acquired Immune 
Deficiency Syndrome (AIDS) with symptoms related to HIV disease who would 
otherwise require nursing facility or hospital level of care.  Services provided 
include case management, skilled nursing, attendant care, psycho-social 
counseling, non-emergency medical transportation, homemaker services, 
specialized medical equipment and supplies, minor physical adaptations to the

[page 31]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
 
 
 
 
 
SECTION NO. : 51346      MANUAL LETTER NO.: 307     DATE: 12/10/09        19D-11.14 
home, a limited supplement for infants and children in foster care, nutritional 
supplements/home delivered meals.  
 
The Office of AIDS contracts with MCWP projects to implement the program at 
the local level and provide interdisciplinary comprehensive nurse and social work 
case management services. The case managers at these local Waiver agencies 
initiate and oversee the process of assignments, care plan development, service 
arrangement, ongoing monitoring and r eassessments of a client’s needs. To 
arrange for services, case management staff must first explore support that might 
be available through family, friends, and the volunteer community. They then 
review existing publicly funded services and make direct referrals whenever 
possible. If needed services are not av ailable through these resources, the case 
manager can authorize the purchase of services from MCWP funds. Referrals to 
the MCWP come from a variety of sources including, but not limited to, local 
county agencies, social service and aging organizations, hospitals, home care 
agencies, and a variety of other community-based groups. 
 
2. Referring Agency: Local AIDS MCWP projects 
 
MCWP projects will refer applicants to the county for determination of Medi-Cal 
eligibility.  An individual must be a Medi-Cal beneficiary prior to enrollment in 
the AIDS MCWP. 
 
3. Eligibility 
  
 The individual must be eligible for full scope benefits and meet all regular  
Medi-Cal eligibility. No special Medi-Cal income, property or institutional 
deeming rules apply. If the applicant is living in the home, he/she is not in a 
separate MFBU from his/her parent/spouse. 
 
V. GENERAL PROCESSING INFORMATION 
  
A. Notices of Action (NOA) 
 
All waiver applicants should receive a NOA approving or denying Medi-Cal 
eligibility. The county will send a NOA to  the applicant and a copy to the 
appropriate State referring agency, MSSP site or Regional Center. The MSSP, 
IHO, and DDS waiver applicants and beneficiaries have special NOAs. The 
MCWP projects also sends out a special NOA. Copies of these NOA’s are 
included in these procedures.  
 
B. Beginning Date of Waiver Eligibility 
  
The effective date of Medi-Cal coverage for applicants of a waiver where the 
waiver has special eligibility rules should be the date the following two 
requirements are met:

[page 32]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
 
 
 
 
 
SECTION NO. : 51346      MANUAL LETTER NO.: 307     DATE: 12/10/09        19D-11.15 
1. The referring agency determines that it is medically appropriate for the 
waiver applicant to be in that waiver, and 
 
2. The county determines that the waiver applicant meets the Medi-Cal 
eligibility requirements under that waiver. 
 
 
Counties should contact IHO, the MSSP c ontact person, or the Regional Center 
to determine the effective date unless it is indicated on the referral form. NOTE: 
Retroactive eligibility rules as stated in Section 50710 of the California Code of 
Regulations remain in effect except for the MSSP Waiver. 
 
C.    There may be waiver persons requ esting In-Home Supportive Services (IHSS). 
The IHSS residual component does not waive parental income and resources of 
parents or use spousal impoverishment rul es; therefore, it is unlikely that the 
beneficiary will be eligible. Counties may refer these persons to the PCSP 
component of IHSS; however, a parent or spouse may not be the provider of 
services.  
 
D. Annual Redetermination

[page 33]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
 
 
 
 
 
SECTION NO.: 51346      MANUAL LETTER NO.: 307     DATE: 12/10/09        19D-12 
The county shall redetermine eligibility  as required by section 50189.  Only 
information about the waiver beneficiary is required. Counties should check with 
IHO, the MSSP contact, or the referring Regional Center at the yearly 
determination to verify that the waiver beneficiary is still medically eligible for 
the waiver unless there is an agreement that the agency will notify the county if a 
beneficiary is no longer eligible for the waiver. 
 
E. Medi-Cal Family Budget Unit (MFBU) 
  
Persons in the MSSP, HCBS, and DDS waivers are in their own MFBU. Spousal 
Impoverishment rules apply. Since the waiver person is in his/her own MFBU, 
the maintenance need or income limit for the waiver person is based on a family 
size of one for the appropriate program  rather than the $35 personal needs 
allowance. If there are multiple persons in the same household applying for these 
waivers, each person is in his/her own MFBU. If other family members are 
applying for or are receiving regular Medi-Cal, the IHO, MSSP, or DDS waiver 
applicant/beneficiary should be treat ed similar to public assistance (PA) 
recipients, e.g., they are not in the MFBU with other family members; however, 
they may be used to link other family members. Persons applying for the other 
waivers that do not use special eligibilit y rules are considered part of the 
household if they are determined to be living in the home; therefore, regular 
Medi-Cal MFBU rules apply. NOTE: if it is more beneficial for the person to be 
in the MFBU with the other family members, the waiver applicant may choose 
not to be in the waiver and to be determined under regular Medi-Cal rules. The 
county should notify the referring agency of the decision.  
 
F. SSI Personal Needs Allowance (PNA) 
  
 Effective June 1, 1990, federal law began allowing a former institutionalized SSI 
child the same personal needs allowance (PNA) as an institutionalized SSI child 
as long as the non-institutionalized child is in a home and community-based 
waiver. Because the Social Security Administration (SSA) needs to confirm that 
such a child is in a waiver before the PNA can begin or that such child remains in 
a waiver for the PNA to continue, coun ties may be requested to verify such 
information at the time waiver cove rage begins and then at the SSA 
redetermination. Since such information is  confidential, counties must first have 
permission from the child’s parent or from another appropriate adult before 
releasing this information to SSA. The DHS 7071 form was developed to secure 
this parental consent and may be used to release this information to SSA.  
 
Although DHS has developed a system to allow the waiver aid code to continue, 
counties should be aware that in some  cases (depending on how SSA enters the 
information), when the waiver beneficiary begins receiving the PNA, MEDS will 
convert the waiver aid code to an aid code of 60. If this occurs and the waiver 
person is still living in the home and is not eligible for a regular SSI payment, 
counties should contact DHS so this may be corrected.

[page 34]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
 
 
 
 
 
SECTION NO.: 51346      MANUAL LETTER NO.: 307     DATE: 12/10/09        19D-13 
G. Quality Control 
   
Counties should indicate th at a special income and resource determination was 
used when determining eligibility for persons in the IHO, MSSP, and DDS 
waivers to prevent confusion when pers ons such as Quality Control review the 
file.  A copy of the DDS or CDA referral form or IHO notice should also be in 
the file. 
 
VI. FORMS, NOTICES, AND BROCHURES 
 
1. Department of Developmental Services Waiver Referral Form (DHS 7096) 
2. Spanish DDS Waiver Referral Form  (DHS 7096 SP) 
3. Medi-Cal Waiver Information and Authori zation [formerly called the “SSI Payments 
for Disabled Children Living at Home” (DHS 7071) 
4. Approval Notice of Action for the DDS Waiver (MC 341) 
5. Spanish Approval Notice of Action for the DDS Waiver (MC 341 SP) 
6. Denial or Discontinuance Notice of Action for the DDS Waiver (MC 342) 
7. Spanish Denial or Discontinuance Notice of Action for the DDS Waiver               
(MC 342 SP) 
8. Regional Center Contacts  
9. Department of Developmental Services Brochure  
10. IHO Waiver Medi-Cal Eligibility Notice for all Applicants Except Los Angeles 
County (Number1) 
11. IHO Waiver Medi-Cal Eligibility Noti ce for Los Angeles County Applicants 
(Number 2) 
12. IHO Waiver to inform a DDS Waiver Benefi ciary of a Change to the HCBS Waiver 
(Number 3) 
13. Approval Notice of Action for the IHO Waiver (MC343) 
14. Spanish Approval Notice of Action for the IHO Waiver (MC 343 SP) 
15.  Denial or Discontinuance Notice of Action for the IHO Waiver (MC 344) 
16.  Spanish Denial or Discontinuance Notice of Action for the IHO Waiver (MC 344 SP) 
17.  In-Home operations Brochures 
18.  AIDS Medi-Cal Waiver Program Notice of Action (MCWP2) 
19.  Spanish AIDS Medi-Cal Waiver Program Notice of Action (MCWP2 SP) 
20.  MSSP Site Roster  
21.  MSSP Contact Names 
22.  MSSP Approval Notice of Action (MC 365) 
23.  Spanish MSSP Approval Notice of Action (MC 365 SP) 
24.  MSSP Denial or Discontinuance of Benefits (MC 366) 
25.  Spanish MSSP Approval Notice of Action (MC 366 SP) 
26.  California Department of Aging Waiver Referral Form (MC 364)

[page 35]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
 
 
 
 
 
SECTION NO.: 51346      MANUAL LETTER NO.: 307     DATE: 12/10/09        19D-14 
27.  County Waiver Contacts 
28.  Approval of Enrollment in Assisted Living Waiver with Medi-Cal Changes for 
Beneficiary (MC 240) 
29.  Denial of Enrollment in Assisted Living Waiver and/or Medi-Cal (MC 242) 
30.  Approval of Enrollment in Assisted Living Waiver and Initial Medi-Cal (MC 241)  
31.  Assisted Living Waiver Referral Form

[page 36]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
slate 01 ~ablmnm-~e~th aM Human Sewres Ape9 De~wrnenl 01 Healtn Servses 
-- 
DEPARTMENT OF 
DEVELOPMENTAL SERVICES 
WAIVER REFERRAL 
CALIFORNIA REGIONAL CENTER-Please complete this portion and forward to the appropriate County Waiver Contact Person. 
Name of applcant 
I I' 
ParenVGuardian (it applicable) 
Address (number, street) 
I I 
State City 
STATUS 
ZIP code 
Telephone Social Secunty number 
0 New Medi-Cal applicant. 
0 Currently receives Medi-Cal with a share of cost. Reevaluate under special institutional deeming rules. 
Date of birth 
Address of parenVguaidlan (11 dlnerem) 
LIVING ARRANGEMENT 
State Ctty 
0 The applicant is currently in an institution. Please determine Medi-Gal eligibility based on hislher anticipated return to the home. 
ZfP code 
- 
Anticipated date of discharge 
0 The applicant is currently living in the home. 
IJ Other: 
This is to certify that the individual named above has met the admission criteria for an intermediate care facility for the developmentally 
disabled as defined in the California Health and Safety Code, Chapter 2, Section 1250. 
Signature of Regional Center contact person 
NOTE TO COUNTY: The eligibility determination waives parental and spousal income and resources even if the 
applicant lives in the home. See Section 19D of the Medi-Cal Eligibility Procedures Manual. If the 
applicanubeneficiary is entitled to zero share of cost Medi-Cal under regular eligibility rules, no waiver is required. 
r 
Please send a copy of the Notice of Action to the Regional Center when the determination is completed. 
White: County copy Yellow: Regional Center Copy 
DHS 7096 (7199) 
Telephone 
Stale 
( 1 
ZIP code 
Pnnted name of Reglonal Center contact person 
Regional Center address (number, stret) 
SECTION NO.: 51346 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 29 1 DATE: 09/03/04 19D-15 
-- 
Xtle 
City

[page 37]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
Slate of CYifomtbHeYLh an6 Human Servhes Agency 
ENV~O A PROGRAMAS ESPECIALES 
DEL DEPARTAMENTO QUE PROPORCIONA 
SERVlClOS A PERSONAS CON 
INCAPACIDADES ADQUlRlDAS AL NACER 0 
DURANTE EL DESARROLLO 
CENTRO REGIONAL DE CALIFORNIA4or favor, Ilene esta parte y enviela a la persona encargada de programas especiales del condado. 
Nombre deVde la sollcltante 
Nuevo(a) solicitante de Medical. 
0 Actualmente recibe Medial con una parte del costo. Volver a evaluar conforme a reglas institucionales especiales consideradas. 
D~reccldn (numero, calle) 
Numero de Seguro Soclal 
ARREGLOS DE VlVlENDA 
Cbdigo postal Dlrecctbn del padrelrnadreAutor(a) legal (si es diferente) 
0 Ellla solicitante vive actualmente en una instalaci6n. Por favor determine la elegibilidad de MediiCal basandose en su regreso previsto 
al hogar. Fecha prevista para que se le de de aka 
0 EVla solicitante vive actualmente en el hogar. 
Padre/Madrflutor(a) legal (51 es pectlnente) 
( ) 
0 Otro: 
C6dlgo postal Cludad 
Cludad 
Esto es para cerlificar que el individuo mencionado anferiormente ha cumplido con 10s requisites de ingreso a on centro de convalecencia 
para personas con incapacidades adquiridas a1 nacer o duranfe el desarrollo, seglin se define en la seccion 1250, capitulo 2, del C&go de 
Enado 
Estado 
. . 
Seguridad y Salud de ~alifornia. 
Flrma de la persona encargada del Cenlro Regional 
Fecha de naclmlento 
> 
Nornbre en letra de molde de la persona encargada del Centro Regional 1 Titulo I Tel6fono 
Telblono 
NOTA AL CONDADO: La determinaci6n de elegibilidad posterga el ingreso y 10s recursos paternoslmaternos Y 
conyugales, aun si ellla solicitante vive en ei hogar. Vea la seccion 19D del Manual de Procedirnientos de Elegibilidad 
de Medi-Cal. Si ellla solicitantelbeneficiario(a) tiene derecho a Medi-Cal sin parte del costo conforme a las reglaS 
regulares de elegibilidad, no se requiere ninguna postergaci6n. 
Direrribn del Centro Reg~onal (nurnero, calle) 
Por favor, envie una copia de la Notificacion de Accion al Centro Regional cuando se complete la deterrninacion. 
White: County copy Yellow: Regional Center Copy 
Ciudad 
DHS 7096 (SP) VR9) 
SECTION NO.: 51346 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 29 1 DATE:o~/o~/o~ 19D-16 
( ) 
Estado . C6digo postal

[page 38]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
Sweaf CaMwrubHellh wJ Hvrnan SMI1 Agew hcairnenl 01 Health Sew- 
MEDI-CAL WAIVER INFORMATION 
AND 
AUTHORIZATION 
COUNTY USE ONLY 
yj 
ParenUGuardian: If your child was receiving Supplemental Security Income (SSI) payments while in an institution. Is under 18 years of age, is now 
receiving Medi-Cal benefits, is now living at home, and is currently in a home- and community-based waiver program, helshe may be eligible to 
receive a monthly SSI personal needs payment. Please complete this portion of the form and forward to the County Waiver Person if your child is in 
a MedCCal In-Home Operations or Developmental Services Waiver. For other waivers, forward this form to the State of California, Department of 
Health Sewices, Medi-Cal Eligibility Branch. Mail Station 4608. P.O. Box 997413. Sacramento. CA 95899-7413. After the County or State has verified 
!hat your child is in a Medi-Cal waiver, submil this form to the Social Security Administration for a determination. SSA will continue to contact the 
County or State each year prior to continuing the personal needs payment. 
I, the parent or guardian of the above child, authorize the County of or the State of California to disclose 
to the Social Security Administration information about the above child's status in the Medical home- and community-based waiver program. 
ZIP mde 
- - 
COUNTY DEPARTMENT OF SOCIAL SERVICES: Please verify that the above child is currently receiving Medi-Cal benefits at home 
and is receiving services under the Model or DDS waiver. 
Stale Mueu (numea. %rM) 
Address of wenuguadlan (11 dtflaenl) 
I certify that the above named child is receiving Medi-Cal benefits under one of the following home- and community-based waivers: 
CW 
Stale Ctly 
0 Medi-Cal In-Home Operations Waivers Nursing Facilities Waiver (Parental income and resources do not apply.) 
0 Developmental Services Waiver (Parental Income and resources do not apply.) 
ZIP mde 
Pnled nme 1 VUa Telephone 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA, DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES: Please verify that the above child is currently receiving Medi-Cal 
benefits and receiving waiver services. 
Ccunty adaress (number Nee11 
Slgnaure 01 state authcfmng -n 
C~ty 
> 
White: Parent copy 
DHS 7071 (1104) 
( 1 
State address (numb% Sueell 
Yellow- County copy 
Stale 
Tele~hone Rlnled name 
SECTION NO.: 51346 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 29 1 DATE: 09/03/04 19D-17 
ZIP me 
litle 
Cll y 
( ) 
Stale ZIP code

[page 40]
-- - 
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
Stale ol CaofcmlbHeenh and Hman Sewer Agency 
MEDI-CAL r 
NOTICE OF ACTION 
Department of Developmental Services 
Waiver 
Approval for Benefits 
Department 01 Healm Savlce. 
7 
(COUNPT STAMP) 
1 
Notice date: 
Case number: 
Worker name: 
Worker number: ' 
Worker telephone number: 
J 
Office hours: 
Notice for: 
The Department of Developmental Services Waiver program is limited to developmentally disabled persons 
who live at home and meet the admission criteria for an intermediate care facility for the developmentally 
disabled. 
0 You are eligible for this program at no cost. 
0 You are eligible for this program with a monthly share-of-cost of $ 
Please notify your worker if there are any changes in your medical condition, living situation, income, or 
property. 
Always present your Benefits Identification Card (BIC) to your medical provider whenever you need care. This 
card is good as long as you are eligible for Medi-Cal. DO NOT THROW AWAY YOUR BIC. 
The regulation which requires this action is California Code of Regulations, Title 22, Section 51346. 
cc: Regional Center 
PLEASE READ THE REVERSE SIDE OF THIS NOTICE. 
kc341 ~8102) 
-- --- 
SECTION NO.: 51346 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 29 1 DATE: 09/03/04 19D-18

[page 41]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
slate d Califmda-H&h and Hunan Services Agwnl 0- d H&h 
NOTIFICACI~N DE ACCION r 
DE MEDI-CAL 
1 
Aprobaci6n de la Extensi6n de Beneficios 
del Departamento de Se~icios para Personas 
con lncapacidades Adquiridas al Nacer o 
Durante el Desarrolo L 
(COUNTY STAMP) 
_I 
1 
Fecha de la notificaci6n: 
Numero del caso: 
Nombre del trabajador: 
Nbmero del trabajador: 
Numero de telefqno del trabajador: 
J 
Horas hlbiles: 
Notificacbn para: 
El programa de Extensibn de Beneficios del Departamento de Servicios a Personas con lncapacidades 
Adquiridas al Nacer o Durante el Desarrollo se limita a personas incapacitadas, desde el punto de vista del 
desarrollo, que viven en el hogar, y que cumplen con 10s criterios de ingreso de un centro de convalecencia de 
cuidados intermedios para las personas incapacitadas desde el punto de vista del desarrollo. 
0 Usted reune 10s requisitos para este programa sin costo alguno. 
0 Usted reune 10s requisitos para este programa con una parte del costo mensual de $ 
Por favor, notifique a su trabajador(a), si hay algun cambio en su condici6n medica, situaci6n de vivienda, 
ingresos o bienes. 
siempre presente su Tarjeta de Identificacibn de Beneficios (BIC) a su proveedor mkdico, cada vez que 
necesite atencibn. Esta tarjeta es vhlida mientras usted reuna 10s requisitos para recibir beneficios de 
Medi-Cal. NO TIRE SU BIC. 
La regulacibn que exige esta acci6n es la Secci6n 51346, del Titulo 22, del Cbdigo de Regulaciones de 
California. 
cc: Centro Regional 
POR FAVOR LEA EL REVERS0 DE ESTA NOTIFICACI~N. 
MC 341 (SP) 18/02) 
SECTION NO.: 51346 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 291 DATE: 09/03/04 19D-19

[page 42]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
Stale of CdtfornlbHeam and Hman Services Agenq Oepanmenl of Heann 
MEDI-CAL r 
NOTICE OF ACTION 
Department of Developmental Services 
Waiver 
Denial or Discontinuance of Benefits 
(COUNTY STAMP1 
1 
Notice date: 
Case number: 
Worker name: 
Worker number: 
Worker telephone number: 
J 
Once hours: 
Notice for: 
The Department of Developmental Services Waiver program is limited to developmentally disabled persons 
who live at home and meet the admission criteria for an intermediate care facility for the developmentally 
disabled. 
0 Your benefits under this program will be discontinued effective the last day of 
0 Your application date of is denied. 
Here islare the reason(s) why: 
0 Your property is over the limit of 
0 The regional center has informed us that you are no longer eligible for waiver services. 
0 You are now living in a community care facility. 
You will receive another notice if you are eligible for another Medi-Cal program. 
DO NOT THROW AWAY YOUR PLASTIC BENEFITS IDENTIFICATION CARD (BIC). You can use it again if ! 
you become eligible or are eligible for another Medi-Cal program. 
The regulation which requires this action is California Code of Regulations, Title 22, Section 51346. 
cc: Regional Center 
PLEASE READ THE REVERSE SIDE OF THIS NOTICE. 
MC 342 I&D21 
SECTION NO.: 51346 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 291 DATE: 09/03/04 19D-20

[page 43]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
%la ol Ca)danla--Halh and Human Smes Agerm Oepatmanl d He& Sen- 
NOTIFICACION DE ACCION r 
DE MEDI-CAL 
Negacion o Descontinuacion de la Extensi6n de 
Beneficios del Departamento de Servicios a 
Personas con lncapacidades Adquiridas a1 
Nacer o Durante el Desarrolo L 
(COMN STAMP) 
1 
Fecha de la notificaa6~ 
Nurnero del caso: 
Nombre del trabajador: 
Nurnero del trabajador: 
Nurnero de telt5fono del trabajador: 
J 
Horas hAbiles: 
Notificacion para: 
El programa de Extension de Beneficios del Departamento de Servicios a Personas con lncapacidades 
Adquiridas al Nacer o Durante el Desarrollo se limita a personas incapacitadas desde el punto de vista del 
desarrollo, que viven en el hogar y que cumplen con 10s criterios de ingreso de un centro de convalecencia de 
cuidados intermedios para las personas incapacitadas desde el punto de vista del desarrollo. 
CJ Sus beneficios bajo este programa se descontinuaran a partir del ultimo dia de 
0 Su fecha de solicitud del se niega. 
A continuacidn se le da(n) la($ razon(es): 
0 Sus bienes estan por encima del limite de 
El centro regional nos ha informado que usted ya no reune 10s requisitos para 10s servicios de extension. 
0 Usted ahora vive en un establecimiento de cuidado en la comunidad. 
Usted recibira otra notificaci6n, si usted reune 10s requisitos para otro programa de Medi-Cal. 
NO TIRE SU TARJETA DE IDENTIFICACION DE BENEFlClOS DE PL~TICO (BIC). Usted. puede usarla de 
nuevo si reune 10s requisitos para otro programa de Medi-Cal. 
La regulation que exige esta accion es la Seccion 51346, del Titulo 22, del Codigo de Regulaciones de 
California. 
cc: Centro Regional 
SECTION NO.: 51346 MANUALLETTERNO.: 291 - DATE:09/03/04 19D-21

[page 44]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
December 1,2003 
CONTACTS Fa11 BEGIOIW CEHTEBS 360 - 380 r~ I I 
REGIONAL CENTER 
SECTION NO.: 51346 
I 
1 360 FRANK D. LANTERMAN REGIONAL 
1 CENTER 
3303 Wilshire Boulevard, Suite 700 
LOS Angeles CA 9001 0 
361 GOLDEN GATE REGIONAL 
CENTER 
120 Howard Street, Fourth Floor 
San Francisco, CA 941 05-1 848 
362 SAN DlEGO REGIONAL CENTER 
14355 Ruffin Road, suite 205 
San Diego, CA 92123-1 648 
363 FAR NORTHERN REGIONAL 
CENTER 
1377 East Lassen Avenue 
Chico, CA 95973 
364 ALTA CALIFORNIA REGIONAL 
CENTER 
2135 Butano Drive 
Sacramento, CA 95825 
365 SAN ANDREAS REGIONAL 
CENTER 
300 Orchard City Drive, Suite 170 
Campbell, CA 95008 
366 TRI-COUNTIES REGIONAL 
CENTER 
520 East Montecito 
Santa Barbara, CA 93103 
367 CENTRAL VALLEY REGIONAL 
CENTER 
461 5 Marty Avenue 
Fresno, CA 93722 
368 REGIONAL CENTER OF ORANGE 
COUNTY 
801 Civic Center Drive, Suite 300 
Santa Ana, CA 92701 - 
MANUAL LETTER NO.: 29 1 DATE: 09/03/04 19D-22 
MEDICAID WAIVER 
COORDINATOR 
ALTERNATE 
MEDICAID WAIVER 
COORDINATOR 
Ardis Adrian, R.N. 
(21 3) 383-1 300 X 746 
(213) 383-6526 (FAX) 
ardis.adrian@lanterman.org 
Candace Sultan, R.N. 
(41 5) 546-9222 X 400 
candacepge@aol.com 
Carol Jean Thomas, 
QMRP 
(858) 576-2985 
cjthomas@?sdrc.org 
Mary McCart, QMRP 
(530) 895-8633 
mmccart@farnorthernrc.org 
Peggy Ann Feldt, RNMS, 
QMRP 
(91 6) 978-6378 
pfeldt@altaregional.org 
Florence N. Yalung, 
District Manager 
Resource and Federal 
Programs 
(408) 341 -3485 
saflo@sarc.org 
Cheryl Wenderoth, QMRP 
(805) 884-721 0 (SB Office) 
(805) 485-31 77x251 (V 
Off.) 
cherylw@tricounties.org 
Holly Lovett, QMRP 
(559) 738-221 0 
1945 East Noble 
Visalia, CA 93292-1 51 6 
hlovett@cvrc.org 
Randy Laya, M.S 
(714) 796-5221 
rlaya@rcocdd.com 
Grace Kotchouian, R.N. 
(21 3) 383-1 300 
Sylvia Flores 
(213) 383-1300 X 706 
Carla Kania, R.N. 
(41 5) 546-9222 X 200 
(41 5) 546-1 91 0 (FAX) 
Roy Carroll, QMRP 
(858) 576-2992 
(858) 496-4327 (FAX) 
Tamara Panther 
(530)222-8795 X 3360 
P.O. BOX 49241 8 
Redding, CA 96049 
(530) 895-1501 (FAX) 
(91 6) 489-6385 (FAX) 
Ken Heritier, QMRP 
(408) 341-3514 
(408) 376-0586 (FAX) 
(805) 884-9374 (FAX) 
Lidia Ramirez Garza, 
QMRP 
(559) 276-4487 
(559) 276-4450 (FAX) 
Lynn Maltz 
(714) 796-521 8 
(714) 547-7278 (FAX)

[page 45]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
SECTION NO.: 51346 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 291 DATE: 09/03/04 19D-23 
ALTERNATE 
MEDICAID WAIVER 
COORDiNATOR 
Clarice Schnepf, R.N. 
(909) 890-3428 
(909) 890-3001 (FAX) 
cschnepf@inlandrc.org 
(707) 444-3409 (FAX) 
Marilyn Halloran, Sup. 
Adult Services Unit 
(707) 256-1248 
MarilynH@nbrc.net 
(707) 256-1270 (FAX) 
Melvina Mull 
(661) 327-8531 x 368 
mmull@kernrc.org 
(661) 324-5060 (FAX) 
Judy Matthews, RN 
(626) 299-4788 
(626) 281 -1 163 (FAX) 
Cynthia Stakley, RN 
(213) 763-5631 
(21 3) 744-8888 (FAX) 
Laura Garabedian, R.N. 
(310) 543-1 71 1 
(310) 540-9538 (FAX) 
Transito Rivas 
(310) 258-4106 
(31 0) 338-9744 (FAX) 
REGIONAL CENTER 
369 INLAND REGIONAL CENTER 
674 Brier Drive 
San Bernardino, CA 92408 
370 REDWOOD COAST REGIONAL 
CENTER 
525 Second Street, Suite 300 
Eureka, CA 95501 
371 NORTH BAY REGIONAL CENTER 
10 Executive Court, Suite A 
Napa, CA 94558 
372 KERN REGIONAL CENTER 
3200 North Sillect Avenue 
Bakersfield, CA 93308 
373 EASTERN LOS ANGELES 
REGlONA 
L 
CENTER 
1000 South Fremont Avenue 
Alhambra, CA 91802-7916 
374 SOUTH CENTRAL LOS ANGELES 
REGIONAL CENTER 
650 West Adams Blvd, Suite 400 
Los Angeles, CA 90007 
375 HARBOR REGIONAL CENTER 
Del Amo Business Plaza 
21231 Hawthorne Boulevard 
Torrance, CA 90503 
376 WESTSIDE REGIONAL CENTER 
5901 Green Valley Circle, #320 
Culver City, CA 90230-6938 
MEDICAID WAIVER 
COORDINATOR 
Margie Henderson 
(909) 890-3425 
(909) 890-3007 (FAX) 
rnhenderson@inlandrc.org 
Tina Moulton 
(707) 445-0893 X 363 
tmoulton@redwoodcoastrc.org 
Kay Bany, QMRP 
(707) 256-1 183 
Kavb@nbrc.net 
Rhea Schnurman 
(707) 566-3006 
RheaS@nbrc.net 
Cherylle Mallinson, MS, 
QMRP 
(661) 327-8531 x 246 
crnallinson@kernrc.org 
Jesse Valdez, Manager of 
Specialized Svs., QMRP 
(626) 299-471 9 
jvaldez@elarc.org 
Fezem Shabaf, RN 
(213) 744-8850 
fezems@sclarc.orq 
Paula Fiebert, QMRP 
(31 0) 543-061 5 
paulaf@hddf.com 
Marguerite Phillips, LCSW 
Director of Federal 
Revenue Programs 
(31 0) 543-0659 
rnarguerp@hddf.com 
Bill Feeman, RN 
(31 0) 258-41 32 
billf@westsiderc.org

[page 46]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
SECTION NO.: 51346 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 29 1 DATE: 09/03/04 19D-24 
REGIONAL CENTER 
377 VALLEY MOUNTAIN REGIONAL 
CENTER 
7109 Danny Way 
Stockton, CA 95269 
378 NORTH LOS ANGELES REGIONAL 
CENTER 
15400 Sherman Way, Suite 170 
Van Nuys, CA 91406-421 1 
379 SAN GABRlELlPOMONA 
REGIONAL CENTER 
761 Corporate Center Drive 
Pomona, CA 91 768 
380 EAST BAY REGIONAL CENTER 
7677 Oakport Street, Suite 1200 
Oakland, CA 94621 
MEDICAID WAIVER 
COORDINATOR 
Katina Richison, QMRP 
(209) 955-361 6 
krichison@vmrc.net 
(209) 478-3539 (FAX) 
Anthony Hill 
(209) 955-3258 
a hill@vmrc.net 
(209) 473-071 9 (FAX) 
Laura Rankin, QMRP 
(81 8) 756-6270 
laurar@nlacrc.com 
Guadalupe Magallanes, 
QMRP 
(909) 868-7793 
gmagallanes.sgprc.org 
Cristie Guss, M.S., QMRP 
(51 0) 383-1 375 
cc~uss@rceb.orq 
Carolyn Bressler, QMRP 
(510) 383-1351 
cbressler@rceb.org 
ALTERNATE 
MEDICAID WAIVER 
COORDINATOR 
Joyce Young-Lofton, 
RN QMRP 
(209) 529-2626 X 2133 
(Modesto) 
(209) 955-3276 (Stockton) 
Shelbi Stoecklin, QMRP 
Federal Programs Spec. 
(209) 955-3672 
sstoecklin@vrnrc.net 
Maria Bratley 
(818) 756-6381 
(818) 756-6390 (FAX) 
Liz Serna 
(909) 868-7655 
(909) 622-5123 (FAX) 
Letha Sellars 
(909) 868-751 8 
Bev Davis, QMRP 
(51 0) 383-1281 
bdavis@rceb.org 
(510) 633-5020 (FAX) 
(510) 633-5021 (FAX) 
(510) 633-5022 (FAX)

[page 50]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
-- - 
+ WHAT IS THE HOME AND 
COMMUNITY- BASED SERVICES 
(HCBS) WANER? 
The HCBS Waiver is a way to fund certain 
services that allow a person who experiences 
developmental disabilities to live at home or in 
the community rather than having to go to live in 
a licensed health facility. 
Costs for these services are funded jointly by the 
federal government's Medicaid program and the 
State of California. 
+ WHAT IS "WAIVED"? 
Certain federal Medicaid rules are "waived". 
allowing the state to provide services to people 
with developmental disabilities in ways that are 
not available to other people who are enrolled in 
Medicaid (which is called Medi-Cal in 
California). One federal condition of the Waiver 
is that those supports or services are different 
than those available through Medi-Cal. 
+ DO I HAVE TO BE ON THE 
WAIVER TO RECEIVE 
REGIONAL CENTER SERVICES? 
If you or your family member is eligible for the 
HCBS Waiver, it is good to enroll in it. That way 
many of the services that you choose will be 
partially paid for by the federal Medicaid 
program This usually means that more people 
like yourself or your family member can receive 
services. 
Enrollment in the HCBS Waiver is a matter of 
choice. Unlike other states that restrict services 
to persons served under the HCBS Waiver, 
California's regional centers provide the full 
scope of state-funded services to all eligible 
persons. 
SECTION NO.: 51346 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 291 DATE: 09/03/04 19D-26

[page 51]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
Whether you are eligible for - and choose - 
enrollment in the HCBS Waiver or not, you or 
your family member will receive the same 
person-centered ' planning, opportunities to 
choose services and providers, and be ensured the 
same quality of care. 
+ WHO BENEFITS FROM THE 
HCBS WAIVER? 
To benefit from the HCBS Waiver you, or your 
family member, must meet three conditions. 
First, you must have "full scope" Medi-Cal 
eligibility - either through your own, your 
family's eligibility or, if you are under the age of 
18, through something called "institutional 
deeming" (see below). Second, you must have a 
formal diagnosis of mental retardation or 
developmental disability and be a regional center 
consumer. Third, you must undergo an 
evaluation that determines that you would benefit 
fiom a certain level of care for your disabilities 
that would be available in a licensed health care 
facility for people who have mental retardation. 
This third qualification is important not because 
you will go to such a facility, but because the 
HCBS Waiver is designed to help people stay in 
the community rather than have to go to such a 
facility to get the services they need. 
+ WHAT IS INSTITUTIONAL 
DEEMING? 
Institutional Deeming is a special Medi-Cal 
eligibility rule that considers only the personal 
income and resources of a person under the age 
of 18 or a rnanied adult who is otherwise eligible 
for the Waiver. This allows a person who meets 
the criteria above to be determined as eligible for 
Medi-Cal regardless of his or her parent's or 
spouse's income and resources. 
This is very helpful because typically a 
family's health insurance or income will not 
cover the total cost of these needed services. 
Through "Institutional Deeming rules," the 
family may now obtain Medi-Cal benefits for 
needed services regardless of income. 
This also allows that person to be eligible for 
all Medi-Cal services - not just those provided 
through the HCBS Waiver. This eligibility 
applies as long as the person is enrolled in the 
Waiver. 
+ THE HCBS WAIVER QUALm 
FRAMEWORK 
The goals of the HCBS Waiver are to ensure 
consumer choice of waiver services, 
consumer satisfaction, and to provide 
safeguards necessary to ensure the health and 
safety of each consumer in the program. 
These goals are accomplished through the 
following framework of quality assurance 
that focuses attention on: 
> Consumer rights to due process, 
grievances, and personal decisions. 
9 Consumer-centered service planning, 
and service modifications in response to 
changing needs. 
> Consumer choice of qualified providers 
and monitoring of providers by the 
regional center. 
9 Consumer health and safety. 
9 A user-friendly enrollment process. The 
regional center determines eligibility for 
the Waiver based on current Medi-Cal 
status, the consumer's level of care 
needs and consumer choice. Consumers 
may also choose to disenroll or terminate 
their participation in the Waiver at any 
time. 
SECTION NO.: 51346 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 291 DATE: 09/03/04 19D-27 
.. ..

[page 52]
-- -- 
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
6s 
State of California-Health and Human Services Agency 
Caltfarnta Department of Health Services 
Depanment of 
Health Sentcer 
Sandra Shewry 
Director 
Arnold Schwarzenegger 
Governor 
((SALUTATION)): 
Medi-Cal In-Home Operations (IHO) Waiver Eligibility Notice 
Individual: ({BENENAMEa 
Social Security Number: ccSSN)) 
Date of Birth: ctDOBn 
Address: ~BENEADDRESSB 
Telephone: ((BENEPHONE)) 
This notice is to confirm that the above-named individual has been determined medically eligible 
for Medi-Cal IHO Waiver services by the Department of Health Services, In-Home Operations 
(IHO) Section. 
If the individual is currentlv not a Medi-Cal beneficiary, helshe must contact 
((COUNTYCONTACT)) in ((COUNTY)) County at ((COUNTYPHONE)), for information on 
how to complete the Medi-Cal application process used in your county. 
If the individual currently is a Medi-Cal beneficiary whose eligibility needs to be 
redetermined, please contact ((COUNTYCONTACT)) in ((COUNTY)) County at 
((COUNTYPHONE)) and request information on the Medi-Cal eligibly redetermination 
process. The county will send a notice to the individual advising himlher of this process. 
Should you have any questions regarding this notice, please feel free to contact me, at (916) 
552-9273. 
Sincerely, 
Carol Hausler, Eligibility Analyst 
In-Home Operations 
Note to County: Requesting effective date of <DATE> 
Do your part to help Califorma save energy. To leam more about saving energy, visit the following web site: 
www.consumerenergycenter.org/flexiindex.html 
- -- 
Letter 1 1501 Cap~tol Avenue MS 4502 P 0 Box 942732, Sacramento. CA 94234-7320 
(916) 552-9273 
Intornot Addrocc smmrr dhc rs nnw 
- 
SECTION NO.: 51346 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 291 DATE: 09/03/04 19D-28

[page 54]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
State of California-Health and Human Services Agency 
Department of Health Services 
Cal8fornla 
Depanmenl of 
Healzn Serrtces 
Sandra Shewry 
Director 
Arnold Schwatzenegger 
Governor 
((DATE)) 
((SALUTATION)): 
Medi-Cal In-Home Operations (IHO) Waiver Eligibility Notice 
Individual: USENENAMEN 
Social Security Number: uSSNH 
Date of Birth: uDOBD 
Address: uBENEADDRESS~ 
Telephone: uBENEPHONEB 
This notice is to confirm that the above-named individual has been determined medically eligible 
for Medi-Cal IHO Waiver services by the Department of Health Services, In-Home Operations 
(IHO) Section. 
If the individual is currently not a Medi-Cal beneficiary, Los Angeles County will send hirnlher a 
Medi-Cal application that will need to be completed and retuned to the county by the date stated 
by the county. 
If the individual currently is a Medi-Cal beneficiary whose eligibility needs to be redetermined, 
the county will send a notice to the individual advising himiher of this process. 
Please note the individual does not need to contact Los Angeles County. 
Should you have any questions regarding this notice, please feel free to contact me, at (916) 
552-9273. 
Sincerely, 
Carol Hausler, Eligibility Analyst 
In-Home Operations 
cc: Ms. Julie Johnson 
Department of Public Social Services 
P.O. Box 92164 
City of Industry, CA 91715-2164 
Note to County: Requesting effective date of <DATE> 
F;;;.;; m; 
Do your part to help California save energy. To learn more about saving energy, visit the following web site: 
Letter 2 1501 Capitol Avenue, MS 4502; P.O. Box 942732; Sacramento, CA 94234-7320 
(91 6) 552-9273 
Intornof Arlrlrorc. ,mmu dhs cz nnu 
SECTION NO.: 51346 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 291 DATE:og/o3/04 19D-29

[page 56]
- -- 
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
State of California-Health and Human Services Agency 
Department of Health Services dKs 
Sandra Shewry 
Director 
Arnold Schwalzenegger 
Govemw 
Dear ((SALUTATION)): 
Medi-Cal In-Home Operations (IHO) Waiver Eligibility Notice 
Individual: ((BENENAME)) 
Social Security Number: (tSSN, 
Date of Birth: ctDOBn 
Address: ((BENEADDRESSn 
Telephone: (tBENEPHONEm 
This notice is to confirm that the above individual's wavier enrollment has been changed to the 
Medi-Cal In Home Operations (IHO) Waiver from the Department of Developmental Services 
(DDS) Wavier effective <<DATE>>. This change of enrollment does not require any action 
by the individual at this time and hislher eligibility remains the same as it was under the 
DDS Waiver. 
A copy of this notice is being sent to ((COUNTYCONTACT)) in ((COUNTY)) County to notify 
them of the change from the Department of Developmental Services Waiver to the Medi-Cal 
IHO Waiver. This letter does not require any action on your part at this time. 
Should you have any questions regarding this notice, please feel free to contact me at (916) 
552-9273. 
Sincerely, 
Carol Hausler, Eligibility Analyst 
In-Home Operations 
cc: ((COUNTYCONTACT)) 
((COUNTYDEPT)) 
((COUNTYADDRESS)) 
((COUNTYCITYSTATEZIP)) 
Note to County: Requesting effective date of <DATE> - 
Do your part to help California save energy. To learn more about saving energy, visit the following web site: 
Letter 3 1501 Capitol Avenue. MS 4502: P.O. Box 942732: Sacramento. CA 94234-7320 
(91 6) 552-9273 
lnt~rnnt Arlrlraec. tmrnr, rfhc rt nn,, 
SECTION NO.: 51346 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 29 1 DATE:O~/O~/O~ 19D-30

[page 58]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
MEDI-CAL r 
NOTICE OF ACTION 
MEDI-CAL IN-HOME OPERATIONS WAIVERS 
APPROVAL FOR BENEFITS 
Depamslt d Hem 
Medi-Cat Program 
1 
L 
(COUKn STAMP) 
_I 
Notice date: 
Case number: 
Worker name: 
Workw number: 
Worker telephone nurnber: 
Oftie hours: 
Notice for: 
The Medi-Cal In-Home Operations Waivers are limited to persons who require the nursing facility 
level of care or subacute services but who wish to live at home or in the community. The income and 
property of a parent is not used in the determination for the applicant or beneficiary child. Institutional 
deeming rules apply if the waiver applicant is living at home with a spouse. 
0 You are eligible for this program at no cost. 
a You are eligible for this program with a monthly share-of-cost of $ 
You do not have to fill out monthly or quarterly status reports to get Medi-Cal. 
You must report within ten days any changes in your income, property, medical condition, or 
household situation. 
You will have to complete a form for your Medi-Cal annual review. 
Getting Medi-Cal does not reduce any time limits for the CalWORKS program. 
Please notify your worker if there are any changes in your medical condition, living situation, income, 
or property. 
Always present your Benefits Identification Card (BlC) to your medical provider whenever you need 
care. This card is good as long as you are eligible for Medi-Cal. DO NOT THROW AWAY YOUR 
BIC. 
The regulation which requires this action is California Code of Regulations, Title 22, Section 51 346. 
cc: In-Home Operations 
SECTION NO.: 51346 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 291 DATE: 09/03/04 19D-31

[page 59]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILIN PROCEDURES MANUAL 
Slae of WiiMaHh and HwMn Savhes Agemy E-?wimmt of Health 
MedbC* P- 
NOTIFICACION DE LA ACCION r 
DE MEDI-CAL 
1 
APROBACI~N DE BENEFlClOS PARA OBTENER UNA 
EXTENSION A LOS SERVlClOS DE MEDI-CAL PARA EL 
CUIDADO MEDICO EN EL HOGAR L 
(COUNTY STAMP) 
_I 
Fecha de la notificaaon: 
1 Nurnem del caw: 
Nmbre del trabajador: 
Ntjrnero del trabajadw: 
Telbfono dd trabajadw: 
Horas de ofidna: 
J 
Notificaci6n de: 
La Extension a 10s Servicios de Medi-Cal para el Cuidado Medico en el Hogar, se limita a personas 
que requieren el nivel de atencion de un establecimiento de cuidado medico o servicios subagudos, 
per0 desean vivir en sus hogares o en la comunidad. Los ingresos y 10s bienes de uno de 10s padres 
no se toman en cuenta para determinar la elegibilidad del solicitante o del nifio beneficiario. Las 
reglas relacionadas a las personas que se consideran como si estuvieran en una institucion, se 
aplican si el solicitante o beneficiario esta viviendo en su hogar con su conyuge. 
0 Usted es elegible para este programa, sin costo alguno. 
0 Usted es elegible para este programa, per0 tendra que pagar mensualmente una parte del costo 
de $ 
Usted no tiene que llenar reportes mensuales o trimestrales para obtener beneficios de Medi-Cal. 
Usted tiene que reportar, en un plazo de diez dias, cualquier cambio en sus ingresos, bienes, 
condicion medica o situacion en el hogar. 
Usted tendra que completar un formulario para su evaluacion anual de Medi-Cal. 
El obtener Medi-Cal no reduce ninglin limite de tiempo para el programa de CalWORKs. 
Por favor notifique a su trabajador si hay cambios en su condicion medica, situacion de vivienda, 
ingresos o bienes. 
Siempre presente su Tarjeta de Identificaci6n de Beneficios (BIC) a su proveedor medico, cada vez 
que necesite atenci6n medica. Esta tarjeta es valida mientras usted sea elegible para recibir 
beneficios de Medi-Cal. NO TIRE SU TARJETA (BIC). 
La regla que exige esta accion se encuentra en la Seccion 51346, del Titulo 22, del Codigo de 
Regulaciones de California. 
cc: In-Home Operations 
SECTION NO.: 51346 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 291 DATE: 09/03/04 19D-32

[page 60]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
Slate d CdilanIbHedth and Human S- AWCy 
MEDI-CAL r 
NOTICE OF ACTION 
MEDI-CAL IN-HOME OPERATIONS WAIVERS 
DENIAL OR DISCONTINUANCE OF BENEFITS 
L 
ICOW STAMP) 
_I 
Notice date: 
1 
Case number: 
Worker name: 
Worker number: 
Worker telephone number: 
Office hours: 
J 
Notice for: 
The Medi-Cal In-Home Operations Waivers are limited to persons who require the nursing facility 
level of care or subacute services but who wish to live at home or in the community. The income and 
property of a parent is not used in the determination for the applicant or beneficiary child. Institutional 
deeming rules apply if the waiver applicant or beneficiary is living at home with a spouse. 
0 Your benefits under this program will be discontinued effective the last day of 
0 Your application date of is denied. 
Here islare the reason(s) why: 
0 Your property is over the limit of $ 
0 You no longer have approved waiver services. 
0 You are no longerlnot living in the home. 
You will receive another notice if you are eligible for another Medi-Cal program. 
DO NOT THROW AWAY YOUR PLASTIC BENEFITS IDENTIFICATION CARD (BIC). You can use it 
again if you become eligible or are eligible for another Medi-Cal program. 
The regulation which requires this action is California Code of Regulations, Title 22, Section 51 346. 
cc: In-Home Operations 
SECTION NO.: 51346 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 291 DATE: 09/03/04 190-33

[page 61]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
state of CalitanlbHeanh and Humsn Se~ces&"01 
NOTIFICAC~ON DE LA ACCION f- 7 
DE MEDI-CAL 
NEGACION 0 DESCONTINUAC~ON DE BENEFlClOS 
PARA OBTENER UNA EXTENSION A LOS SERVlClOS DE 
MEDI-CAL PARA EL CUIDADO MEDICO EN EL HOGAR L 
(COUm STAMP) 
_I 
Fecha de la notificacibn: 
Nurnero del caso: 
1 Nombre del trabajador: 
Numero del trabajador 
Telefono del trabajador: 
Horas de oficina: 
Nolilicacion de: 
J 
La Extension a 10s Servicios de Medi-Cal para el Cuidado Medico en el Hogar, se limita a personas 
que requieren el nivel de atencion de un establecimiento de cuidado medico o servicios subagudos, 
per0 desean vivir en sus hogares o en la comunidad. Los ingresos y 10s bienes de uno de 10s padres 
no se toman en cuenta para determinar la elegibilidad del solicitante o del niiio beneficiario. Las 
reglas relacionadas a las personas que se consideran como si estuvieran en una institution, se 
aplican si el solicitante o beneficiario esta viviendo en su hogar con su conyuge. 
0 Sus beneficios bajo este programa se descontinuaran a partir del ultimo dia de 
0 Su solicitud con fecha del se ha negado. 
Esta(s) eslson la(s) razon(es) por la cual su solicitud se ha negado: 
fJ El valor de sus bienes esta por encima del lirnite de $ 
0 Su extension para recibir servicios no fue aprobada. 
0 Usted ya no vivelno esta viviendo en el hogar. 
Usted recibira otra notificacion si usted es elegible para otro programa de Medi-Cal. 
NO TIRE SU TARJETA DE IDENTIFICACI~N DE BENEFICIOS (BIC). Usted puede utilizarla de 
nuevo, si vuelve a ser elegible para recibir beneficios de otro programa de Medi-Cal. 
La regla que exige esta accion se encuentra en la Seccion 51346, del Titulo 22, del Codigo de 
Regulaciones de California. 
cc: In-Home Operations 
MC 344 (SP) (10103) 
SECTION NO.: 51346 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 29 1 - .- ' - .. DATE: 09/03/04 19D-34 
... ..... - ................... ... __ - . - -

[page 62]
What are 
are offered under 
these dlfferent 
programs? 
0 
0 
request 
OO 
HOME- AND COMMUNITY-BASED 
SERVICES BRANCH 
In-Home Operations (IHO) Section 
1501 Capitol Avenue, MS 4502 
P.O. Box 942732 
Sacramento, CA 94234-7320 
(9 16) 552-9 105 Main number for general information 
(916) 552-915 1 Fax 
IHO Sacramento Regional Office 
Home- and Community-Based Services 
Waiver Intake Unit 
(91 6) 552-9 105 New intakes I information 
(916)552-9151 Fax 
Case Management and EPSDT Units 
(916) 552-9 105 Information 
(916) 552-915 1 Fax 
1HO Los Angeles Regional Office 
Case Management Unit 
3 11 South Spring Street, 31d Floor 
Los Angeies, CA 90030 
(2 13) 897-6774 Information 
(213) 897-7355193 14 Fax 
Arnold Schwanenegger 
Governor 
State of California 
Grantland Johnson 
Secretary 
Health and Human Services Agency 
Medi-Cal Operations Division 
$N-.f4f3iV% k; 01311:l~~4r~'IOhS 
I I ILI 
I IHI 
HOME- AND 
COMMUNITY-BASED 
OPTIONS

[page 63]
IHO is the Section in DHS that oversees 
the development and implementation of 
home and community-based programs 
in the Medi-Cal program. IHO 
authorizes Pediatric Day Health Care 
(PDHC) facility services and medically 
necessary services in the home, 
including private duty nursing services, 
also known as shift nursing. These 
services may be available for Medi-Cal 
beneficiaries who are eligible for Early 
and Periodic, Screening, Diagnosis and 
Treatment (EPSDT) services and/or one 
of the following three federal waiver 
programs: 
In-Home Medical Care (IHMC) 
Nursing Facility (NF) A/B 
Nursing Facility (NF) Subacute 
EPSDT is a Medi-Cal benefit for 
individuals under the age of 21 who 
have full scope Medi-Cal eligibility. 
This benefit allows for periodic 
screenings to determine health care 
needs. Based upon the identified health 
care need, diagnostic and treatment 
services are provided. EPSDT PDHC 
and private duty nursing services arc 
provided in addition to other medically 
necessary Medi-Cal state plan services. 
EPSDT services include all services 
covered by Medi-Cal. In addition to the 
regular Medi-Cal benefits, a beneficiary 
under the age of 21 may receive 
additionally medically necessary 
services. These additional services are 
known as EPSDT Supplemental 
Services and include: private duty 
nursing services from a Registered 
Nurse (RN) or a Licensed Vocational 
Nurse (LVN), Case Management, 
PDHC, and Nutritional and Mental 
Health Evaluations1 Services. 
HCBS waivers allow states that 
participate in Medicaid - known as 
Medi-Cal in California - to develop 
creative alternatives for individuals 
who would otherwise require care in a 
nursing facility or hospital. Medi-Cal 
has, an agreement with the federal 
government that allows for waiver 
services to be offered in either a home 
or community setting. The services 
offered under the waiver must cost no 
more than the alternative institutional 
level of care. Recipients of HCBS 
waivers must have full scope Medi-Cal 
eligibility. 
The available services under these 
HCBS waivers may include RN or 
LVN private duty nursing services, 
Certified Home Health Aide services, 
Case Management, Minor Home 
Modifications, Personal Emergency 
Response System, Family Training, 
Utility Coverage for life sustaining 
equipment, personal care services and 
respite. 
There are a variety of providers, 
including the following: 
For EPSDT -licensed and/or certified 
Medi-Cal providers and/or 
Individually enrolled supplemental 
private duty nursing service providers. 
For HCBS waivers under IHO - 
licensed and certified Home Health 
Agencies, individual nurse providers 
and/or unlicensed caregivers. 
A beneficiary may receive these home 
and community-based services as long 
as medically necessary. 
Once the beneficiary has identified a 
provider of service, the provider must 
submit the request for services to 1HO 
on a Treatment Authorization Request 
(TAR) or similar request. 
In addition to the TAR, the provider 
will also submit the following medical 
documentation: 
Medical information which 
supports request for services, 
Assessment of care needs, i.e., 
nursing, personal care, etc., 
Plan of Treatment signed by a 
physician. and 
Home Safety Evaluation (for 
HCBS waiver services only) 
These documents should support 
medical necessity for the requested 
HCBS waiver or EPSDT 
Supplemental services. 
A request for any service needed for 
the home program or PDHC program 
may be submitted to IHO by the 
appropriate provider. These services 
must be medically necessary. 
Examples of other in-home services 
include: 
Therapy services 
Equipment 
Transportation. 
\\ rros~ rlo For more information about NO, I I o\r.ac-'r please call: 
I:( )R 
rl I\THEI< 
(9 16) 552-9105 in Sacramento 
<)l.E> 1 II.J\S'? (213) 897-6774 in Los Angeles

[page 64]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL - 
Page I of 2 
AlDS Medi-Cal Waiver Program 
NOTICE OF ACTION (NOA) 
DENlAUREDUCTlON/TERMlNATlON OFAIDS MEDI-CAL WAIVER BENEFITS 
Name Date of Notice 
Address Date Services Expire 
Medi-Cat 1.D. # 
Waiver I.D. # 
Medi-Cal regulations allow for the provision of certain AlDS Medi-Cal Waiver Program (MCWP) Home and Community-Based 
Services (HCBS) to persons who meet specific criteria. We have taken the following action with respect to services requested: 
for the reasons noted: 
- '1. Denied your application or ended services for causes such as program noncomplianeor personal safety of 
caregivers or agency staff, specifically 
- 2. Denied your application or ended services because you do not meet eligibility requirements as follows: 
You have not submitted adequate proof of Medi-Cal eligibility, your Medi-Cal eligibility cannot be verified or 
you are not eligible or no longer eligible for Medi-Cal. 
Your medical condition andlor medical needs do not currently meet the Nursing Facility or higher level of care 
and/or your diagnosis of asymptomatic HIV or AlDSrelated medical condition. does not meet eligibility 
requirements, or your 'K score" (the Cognitive and Functional Ability Scale) on the evaluation form that is used 
was too high. 
- 3. Denied andlor reduced some portion of the services requested. Your medical condition andlor medical needs have 
improved necessitating a change in services ordered. 
- 4. Continuing to provide HCBS to you is not cost effective (i.e., the estimated cost of providing you with those services 
exceeds cost guidelines set by the State). 
- 5. Cost of services provided to you has reached the $13,209 calendar year annual cost cap. No more AIDS Medi-Cal 
Waiver services can be provided to you this calendar year. 
- 6. The services you need are fully available to you through private insurance, Medicare, Medi-Cal, or another program. 
- 7. You no longer desire HCBS. 
- 8. Other 
This NOA is required by Code of Federal Regulations. Title 42. Chapter IV, Subpart E, and the California Code of Regulations, 
Title 22, Section 51346. You have the right to ask for a State Hearing (SH) if you disagreed with any MCWP action. You only 
have ninety (90) days to ask for a hearing. The 90 days started the day after the MCWP gave or mailed you this notice. See 
page 2 for your appeal rights. 
Denial or termination of AlDS MCWP benefits will not affect other medical or social services you are eligible to receive through 
California's Medi-Cal Program or other public benefit programs. 
You may reapply for AIDS MCWP benefits at a future time if you believe you have become eligible. 
Please call me for further information or if you have any questions. I may be reached at ( ) . 
Sincerely, 
Agency Representative Agency Name 
SECTION NO.: 51346 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 2 9 1 DATE: 09/03/04 19D-37

[page 65]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
. .- - - - . . -. . . 
Page 2 of 2 
STATE HEARING NOTICE - YOUR RIGHT TO APPEAL THE "NOTICE OF ACTION" 
State Hearino Instructions-If you do not agree with the action described, you may request a State Hearing before an 
Administrative Law Judge employed by the Califomia Department of Social Services (CDSS). This hearing will beconducted in 
an informal manner to assure that everyone present is able to speak freely. Your case manager can help you request a hearing. 
If you decide to request a hearing, you must do so within 90 days of the dateof this notice. Your benefits will only continue until 
the Services Expiration Date listed at the top of page 1 which is at least 10 days from the date of this notice. If you are currently 
receiving AlDS MCWP services and you request a SH before the Date Services Expire indicated at the top of this notice (at 
least10 days after the date of this notice), you will continue to receive services until a SH decision is made. If you are currently 
receiving AlDS MCWP services and you request a SH after the Date Services Expire, your AlDS MCWP services will stop on 
the Date Services Expire. You must verballv notifv vour case manaaer if vou file an appeal within this 10-day Deriod. 
If you wish to request a State Hearing, please complete the attached Request for a State Hearing form and mail it to the 
address listed below or call the phone number provided. You must provide all the information on the form; any information 
missing from the request form may delay the processing of your State Hearing request. If you ask for a hearing the State 
Hearings Division will set up a file. You have the right to see this file before your hearing and to get a copy of the AlDS 
waiver provider's written position on your case at least two days before the hearing. The SHD may give your hearing file to 
the Califomia Department of Health Services and the United States Department of Health and Human Services per Welfare 
and Institutions Code Sections 10850 and 10950. 
How to Reauest a State Hearing-You must either complete the attached Requestfora State Hearing form and mail it 
to: 
Califomia Department of Social Services 
State Hearings Division 
744 P Street, MS-19-37 
Sacramento, CA 9581 4 
Or call 
Toll-Free Number: (800) 952-5253 
Teletypewriter vD) only: (800) 952-8349 
'Your Riahts" Pamphlet Available-"Your Rights under Califomia Welfare Programs pamphlet" issued by CDSS, provides 
useful information about State hearings. This pamphlet will be sent to you when your hearing request is processed. 
Authorized Re~resentative-You can represent yourself at the State Hearing or be represented by a friend, attorney, or any 
other person; but, you are expected to arrange for the representative yourself. You can get help in locating free legal 
assistance by calling the toll-free number of the Public Inquiry and Response Unit (PIAR) at (800) 952-5253. 
The PIAR office can also provide further information about your hearing rights. Assistance is available in languages other 
than English, including Spanish. 
Code of Federal Regulations, Title 42,Section 431.220, Subpart E, Chapter IV, and the California Code of 
Regulations, Title 22, Section 51014.1, require that this Notice of ActionlState Hearing Notice be mailed at time 
of denial of an application when it is determined that you are not eligible for waiver services or at time of reduction 
or termination of existing services. The Notice must be mailed at least 10 calendar days (excluding the mailing 
date) before the effective date of reduction or termination of services. 
MCWPZ (rev 05-2004) Attachment 
SECTION NO.: 51346 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 2 9 1 DATE: 09/03/04 19D-38

[page 66]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
Attachment 
REQUEST FOR A STATE HEARING 
I 
I am requesting a State Hearing because of Medi-Cal related action by 
, an AlDS Medi-Cal 
Waiver agency related to the following reason(s): 
I 
Name 
I 
0 Denial of my application or ending of services for causes such as noncompliance or personal safely of 
caregivers or agency staff OR 
Medi-Cal I.D. Number 
Address 
11 0 Denial of my application or ending of services because I do not meet eligibility requirements 
City 
a Denial andlor reduction of some portion of the service(s) requested OR 
0 Ending of services because it is no longer cost effective to do so or the costs of services provided have 
reached the $1 3,209 calendar year annual cost cap. 
0 Denial of my application or ending of services because services I need are fully available through 
private insurance, Medicare, Medi-Cal, or another program or I no longer desire Home and Community 
Based services. 
Describe the basis for vour a~~eal below: 
I Other 
a I speak a language other than English and need an interpreter for my hearing. (The State will provide 
the interpreter at no cost to you.) 
I 
I "me: Phone Number: 
Language: 
)I Street Address: 
Dialect: 
City: State Zip Code 
0 I want the person named below to represent me at this hearing. I give my permission for this person to 
see my records or go to the hearing for me. (This person can be a friend or relative but cannot interpret 
for you.) 
Date: 
Mail to: California De~artment of Social Services 
State ~earings Division 
744 P Street, MS-19-37 
Sacramento, CA 95814 
Toll-Free Number: (800) 952-5253 
Teletypewriter (TTD) only: (800) 952-8349 
The AIDS Medi-Cal Waiver Program is administered by the Community Based Care Section, Office of 
AIDS, Department of Health Services, P.O. Box 997426, Sacramento, CA 95899-7426, (916) 449-5900. 
11 
CWP2 (rev 05-2004) 
-- 
SECTION NO.: 51346 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 2 9 1 DATE: 09/03/04 19D-39

[page 68]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
Programa de Exencion para Personas con el Sindrorne de lnrnunodeficiencia Adquirida (SIDA) 
bajo el Programa de Asistencia Medica de California (Medi-Cat) 
NOTlFlCAClON DE ACCION (NOA) 
NEGAClONlREDUCClONlDESCONTlNUACION DE LOS BENEFlClOS DE EST€ PROGRAMA 
Nombre Fecha de la notification 
Fecha en que 10s 
Direccidn servicios se descontinuarBn 
Medi-Cal - # de identificacion 
Exencion - # de identiRcaci6n 
Los reglarnentos de Medi-Cal perrniten que se proporcionen ciertos servicios de casa y servicios basados en la comunidad 
(HCBS) a traves del Prograrna de Exencion bajo el Programa de Medi-Cal (MCWP) para Personas con SIDA si estas 
personas cumplen con 10s requisitos especificos. En relacion a 10s servicios que se solicitaron, hernos tomado la siguiente 
accion debido a las razones indicadas: 
- 1. Negarnos su solicitud o descontinuamos sus servicios debido a rnotivos tales corno la falta de curnplimiento con 10s 
requisitos del programa o problernas en relacion a la seguridad personal de 10s proveedores de cuidado o del 
personal de la agencialoficina, especificarnente 
- 2. Negamos su solicitud o descontinuarnos sus servicios debido a que usted no curnple con 10s requisitos de 
elegibilidad corno se indica a continuacion: 
Usted no ha presentado las pruebas adecuadas de elegibilidad para Medi-Cal, su elegibilidad para Medi-Cal no 
se puede verificar, o no es o ha dejado de ser elegible para Medi-Cal. 
[7 Actualrnente, su condicion rnedica ylo sus necesidades medicas no curnplen con 10s requisitos para el cuidado en 
un establecimiento de cuidado medico continuo no intenso o a un nivel mas alto ylo el diagn6stico de que usted 
tiene el virus de inrnunodeficiencia humana (VIH) o SIDA sin presentar sintornas no curnple con 10s requisitos de 
elegibilidad, o su clasificacion en la evaluation que se utiliza (la tabla de habilidad cognoscitiva y habilidad para 
funcionar) fue dernasiado baja. 
- 3. Negarnos y/o redujimos una porcion de 10s servicios que se solicitaron. Su condicion rnedica ylo sus necesidades 
rnedicas han rnejorado lo cual ocasiono un carnbio en 10s servicios que se ordenaron. 
- 4. El continuar proporcionandole 10s servicios HCBS ya no es lo mas econornico (es decir, el costo calculado para 
proporcionarle a usted esos servicios es mas que las norrnas de costo establecidas por el Estado). 
- 5. El costo de 10s servicios que se le han proporcionado ha alcanzado 10s $13.209 que es lo maxirno permitido anualmente 
para un aiio civil. Para este atio civil, ya no puede recibir mas servicios bajo el MCWP para Personas con SIDA. 
- 6. Los servicios que usted necesita estan cornpletarnente disponibles a traves de su seguro privado, Medicare (seguro 
medico federal), Medi-Cal, u otro prograrna. 
- 7. Usted ya no quiere 10s servicios HCBS 
- 8. Otra razon: 
Esta notificacion de accion es un requisito del C6digo de Ordenamientos Federales, Titulo 42, Capitulo IV. Subparte E, y el 
Codigo de Ordenamientos de California, Titulo 22, Seccibn 51346. Usted tiene derecho a solicitar una audiencia con el estado 
(SH) si usted no esta de acuerdo con alguna acci6n en relacion al MCWP. Tiene solamente noventa (90) dias para solicitar una 
audiencia. Los 90 dias ernpezaron a contar al siguiente dia de cuando el MCWP le dio o le envi6 por coneo esta notificaci6n. 
Para 10s derechos que tiene para apelar, vea la pagina 2. 
La negacion o descontinuacion de 10s beneficios del MCWP para Personas con SIDA no afectara otros servicios rn6dicos o 
sociales para 10s cuales usted es elegible bajo el Prograrna de Medi-Cal u otros prograrnas de beneficios publicos. 
En el futuro, puede volver a solicitar 10s beneficios del MCWP para Personas con SIDA si usted Cree que ya es elegible. 
Para mas inforrnacion o si tiene alguna pregunta, por favor Ilarnerne. Mi nurnero de telefono es I ) . 
Atentarnente. 
Representante de la agencialoficina Nornbre de la agencialoficina 
SECTION NO.: 51346 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 29 1 DATE: 09/03/04 19D-40

[page 69]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
NOTIFICACION DE UNA AUDlENClA CON EL ESTADO - SU DERECHO A APELAR LA "NOTIFICACION DE ACCION" 
lnstrucciones en relacion a una audiencia con el estado-Si usted no esth de acuerdo con la acci6n descrita, usted puede 
solicitar una audiencia con el estado ante un juez de leyes administrativas empleado por el Departamento de Servicios Sociales 
de California (CDSS). Esta audiencia se llevara a cabo en una manera informal para asegurar que todas las personas 
presentes puedan hablar libremente. La persona encargada de su caso puede ayudarle a solicitar una audiencia. Si usted 
decide solicitar una audiencia, tiene que hacerlo antes de que pasen 90 dias a partir de la fecha de esta notificacion. Sus 
beneficios solamente continuaran hasta la "Fecha en qua 10s beneficios se descontinuar5n" que aparece en la parte de 
arriba de la pagina 1, la cual es al menos 10 dias despubs de la fecha de esta notificacibn. Si actualmente esth recibiendo 
servicios bajo el MCWP para Personas con SlDA y usted solicita una audiencia wn el estado antes de la "Fecha en que 10s 
beneficios se descontinuarAnn anotada en la parte de arriba de esta notificacion (a1 menos 10 dias despues de la fecha de 
esta notificaci6n). usted continuare recibiendo 10s se~cios hasta qua se emita la decision de la audiencia con el estado. Si 
actualmente esta recibiendo servicios bajo el MCWP para Personas con SlDA y usted solicita una audiencia wn el estado 
despubs de la "Fecha en que 10s beneficios se descontinuahn", 10s servicios se descontinuaran en dicha fecha. Si usted 
presenta una apelacion antes aue se termine el Deriodo de 10 dias. tiene aue notiffcarte verbalmente al trabaiadorencaraado de 
su caso. 
Si desea solicitar una audiencia con el estado, por favor complete el formulario de "Peticion para una audiencia con el 
estado" adjunto y envielo por correo a la direccion que aparece abajo o llame al numero de telbfono que se proporciona. 
Usted tiene que proporcionar toda la informacion en el formulario; cualquier inforrnacion que falte en el formulario pudiera 
atrasar la tramitacion de su peticion para una audiencia con el estado. Si usted solicita una audiencia, la Division de 
Audiencias Administrativas preparara un expediente. A1 menos dos dias antes de su audiencia, usted tiene derecho a ver 
su expediente y a recibir una copia escrita de la declaration de posicibn sobre su caso del proveedor de la exencion para 
las personas con SIDA. De acuerdo a lo estipulado en las Secciones 10850 y 10950 del Codigo de Bienestar Publiw e 
Instituciones, la Division de Audiencias Administrativas puede darle su expediente de la audiencia al Departamento de 
Servicios de Salud de Califomia y al Departamento de Servicios de Salud y Servicios Humanos de 10s Estados Unidos. 
Corno solicitar una audiencia con el estado--Usted puede completar el forrnulario de "Peticion para una audiencia 
con el estado" adjunto y enviarlo por correo al Departamento de Servicios Sociales de California (CDSS) a la 
siguiente direccion: 
California Department of Social Services 
State Hearings Division 
P.O. Box 944243 
Sacramento, CA 94244-2430 
o puede llamar al 
Numero de teldfono gratuito: (800) 952-5253 
Teletipo (TIY) solamente: (800) 952-8349 
Folleto disponible acerca de sus derechos-El folleto "Sus derechos bajo 10s programas de asistencia publica de California" 
publicado por el CDSS le proporciona informacidn util acerca de las audiencias con el estado. Le enviaran este folleto una 
vez que se tramite su peticidn para una audiencia. 
Reoresentante autorizado--En la audiencia con el estado, se puede representar a si mismo o puede ser representado por 
un amigo, abogado, o cualquier otra persona; pero, usted tiene que hacer 10s arreglos para tener a un representante. 
Puede obtener ayuda para localizar asesoramiento legal sin costo llamando al numero de telbfono gratuito de la Oficina de 
Preguntas y Respuestas al Publico (PIAR) al (800) 952-5253. 
La Oficina de PIAR tambibn le puede proporcionar m6s informacibn acerca de sus derechos en relacion a una audiencia. 
Esta informacion se proporciona en varios idiomas aparte del ingles, incluyendo el espafiol. 
' La Seccibn 431.220 del C6dioo de Ordenamientos Federales. Titulo 42. Capitulo IV, Subparte E, y la Secci6n -- -. .~ - - -- -- 
51014.1 del Codigo de ~rdekmientos de California, Titulo 22, estipulan qie esta ~otificaci6n de 
accionlNotificacion de una audiencia con el estado se tiene que enviar por correo cuando se niegue una 
solicitud debido a que se determino que usted ya no es elegible para 10s servicios bajo una exencion o cuando se 
reduzcan o descontin~jen 10s servicios actuales. La notificacion se tiene que enviar por correo al rnenos 10 dias 
consecutivos (excluyendo la fecha en que se envio) antes de la fecha en que entre en vigor la reduccion o 
descontinuacion de 10s servicios. 
SECTION NO.: 51346 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 2 91

[page 70]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
PETlClON PARA UNA AUDlENClA CON EL ESTADO 
I 
Estoy solicitando una audiencia con el estado debido a una accion relacionada a Medi-Cal que tom6 
, una agencialoficina que 
proporciona exenciones para personas con SlDA para el Programa de Medi-Cal. El motivo (o motivos) aparece a 
continuacion: 
Nornbre 
I 
p Negation de mi solicitud o descontinuacidn de 10s servicios debido a motivos tales como la falta de 
cumplimiento con 10s requisitos del programa o problemas en relacion a la segundad personal de 10s 
proveedores de cuidado o del personal de la agencialoficina, Q 
N~imero de Identificacion de Medi-Cal 
Direcci6n 
p Negation de mi solicitud o descontinuacion de 10s servicios debido a que no cumplo con 10s requisitos de 
elegibilidad. Q 
I 
Ciudad 
I p 
Negacion ylo reduccibn de una portion de lor servicios solicitados. Q 
I1 
p Descontinuacion de 10s servicios debido a que el proporcionar 10s servicios ya no es lo mas economico o 
porque el costo de 10s servicios proporcionados ha alcanzado 10s $13,209 que es lo maximo permitido 
anualmente para un atio civil. 
I 
p Negacion de mi solicitud o descontinuacion de 10s servicios debido a que 10s servicios que necesito estan 
completamente disponibles a traves de un seguro privado, Medicare (seguro medico federal), Medi-Cal, u 
otro programa o debido a que yo ya no quiero 10s servicios de casa y basados en la comunidad. 
Otro motivo: 
escriba a continuacion en aue se basa su apelacion: 
I 
I 
p Quiero que la persona cuyo nombre aparece a continuacibn me represente en esta audiencia. Otorgo el 
permiso para que esta persona vea mis expedientes o asista a la audiencia en mi nornbre. (Esta persona 
puede ser un amigo o pariente per0 no puede ser su interprete.) 
Hablo otro idioma que no es el ingles y necesito un interprete para mi audiencia. (El Estado le proporcionarh 
un interprete sin costo para usted.) - I 
Idioma: 
Nombre: Nljmero de telbfono: 
Dialecto: 
Domicilio: 
Ciudad: Estado C6digo postal 
I 
Finna: 
Envie por coneo a: California Department of Social Services 
State Hearings Division 
P.O. Box 944243 
Sacramento. CA 94244-2430 
Nljmero de telefono gratuito: (800) 952-5253 
Teletipo (lTY) solamente: (800) 952-8349 
El Programa de Exencion para Personas con SlDA bajo el Programa de Medi-Cal es administrado por la Seccion del 
Cuidado Basado en la Comunidad en la Oficina del SlDA en el Departamento de Servicios de Salud; la direccion y 
numero de telefono son: AIDS Medi-Cal Waiver Program, Community Based Care Section, Office of AIDS, 
Department of Health Services, 61 1 N. Seventh Street, P.O. Box 942732, Sacramento, CA 94234-7320, 
[I (916) 4450553. j 
MCWP (SP) (Rev. 02-2001) 
SECTION NO.: 51346 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 2 9 1 DATE: 09/03/04 19D-42

[page 72]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
1 CITY OF OAKLAND (PSA 9) (510) 238-3762 FAX # (510) 238-7696 
Analyst: Gloria Abemethy EMAIL: ljohnso~,oaklandnet.com 
~ursi: Vacant 
Linda Johnson, Site Director 
Multipurpose Senior Services Program 
City of Oakland 
Department of Human Services 
150 Frank G. Ogawa Plaza, Suite 4340 
Oakland, California 946 12 
2 COUNTY OF SANTA CRUZ HUMAN (831) 454-4600 FAX # (831) 454-4610 
RESOURCES AGENCY (PSA 13) EMAIL: hra26lmhra.co.santa-cruz.ca.us 
Analyst: John Curnmins 
Nurse: Sheny DeBarbien 
3 ALTAMED HEALTH SERVICES CORP. 
(PSA 25) 
Analyst: John Curnmins 
Nurse: Vacant 
Hugo Romo, Site Director 
Dzrect Line: (323) 307-0229 
Vangie Reichwein Direct Line: (323) 307-0228 
Claudia Gallegos Dired Line: (323) 307-0212 
Martha Ocarnpo Direct Line: (323) 307-021 4 
Anwar Zoueihid Direct Line: (323) 307-0213 
Francie Nedeld, Program Manager 
Multipurpose Senior Services Program 
Adult and Long-Term Care Services 
County of Santa Cruz 
Human Resources Agency 
1400 Emeline Avenue, Building K 
P.O. Box 1320 
Santa CNZ, California 95061 
(323) 307-0200 FAX # (323) 307-0294 
EMAIL: hrom@altamed.orq 
Hugo Romo, Site Director 
Multipurpose Senior Services Program 
AltaMed Senior Health and Activity Center 
5 12 S. Indiana Street 
Los Angeles, California 90063 
*Marie Tones, Senior Vice-President, 
Long-Term Care and Government Relations 
*AU correspondence should have cc to . . 
Marie ~o&es. 
4 JEWISH FAMILY SERVICE OF 1323) 937-5930 FAX # (323) 954-1319 
Los ANGELES (PSA 25) EMAIL: pp4odman@ifsmss~.org 
Analyst: John Curnmins 
Nurse: Sheny DeBarbieri Pem S. Sloane Goodman, Site Director 
Multipurpose Senior Services Program 
Jewish Family Service of Los Angeles 
330 North Fairfax Avenue 
Los Angeles, California 90036 
02-23-2004 MSSP Site Roster 
SECTION NO.: 51346 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 291 DATE: 09/03/04 19D-43

[page 73]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
Analyst: Gloria Abernethy 
Nurse: Sherry DeBarbieri 
Denise Likar, Site Director 
(562) 492-9878, Ext. 138 
Direct Line: (562) 981 -0328 
Denise Likar, Site Director 
Multipurpose Senior Services Program 
Senior Care Action Network Health Plan, Inc. 
2501 Cherry Avenue, Suite 380 
Signal Hill, California 90755 
6 INSTITUTE ON AGING (PSA 6) 1415) 750-4150 FAX # (415) 750-4196 
Analyst: Larry Leboda EMAIL: ahinton@ioap.in~.orp, 
Nurse: Sherry DeBarbien' 
E. Anne Hinton, Director 
Multipurpose Senior Services Program 
Case Management Services 
MSSP/ Linkages Program 
E. Anne Hinton, Site Director Institute on Aging 
Direct Line: (4 1 5) 750-4 1 50, Ext. 300 3626 Geq Boulevard 
San Francisco, California 941 18 
7 SAN DIEGO COUNTY AGING AND (858) 495-5885 FAX # (858) 495-5080 
INDEPENDENCE SERVICES (PSA 23) EMAIL: richard.wann@,sdcounty.ca.~ov 
Analyst: John Cummins 
Nurse: Sherry DeBarbieri 
Rick Wanne, Site Director 
Direct Line: (858) 495-5097 
8 COMMUNITY CARE MANAGEMENT 
CORPORATION (PSA 26) 
AKA: UKIAH 
Analyst: Gloria Abernethy 
Nurse: Vacant 
Cynthia D. Coale, Executive Director 
~ilti~ur~ose senior Services Program 
Community Care Management Corporation 
Main Office: 
301 South State Street 
Ukiah, California 95482 
Rick Wanne, Site Director 
Multipurpose Senior Services Program 
Aging & Independence Services 
County of San Diego 
9335 Hazard Way, Suite 100 
San Diego, California 92 123 
(707) 468-9347 FAX # (707) 468-5234 
Satellite Address b Telephone #s: 
14642 "C" Lakeshore Drive 
Clearlake, California 95422 
(707) 995-70 1 O/F=: (707) 995- 1830 
490 North Harold Street - P.O. Box 1925 
Fort Bragg, California 95437 
(707) 964-4027/Fax: (707) 964-92 14 
9 HUMBOLDT SENIOR RESOURCE (707) 443-9747 FAX # (707) 444-2065 
CENTER, INC. (PSA 1) EMAIL: nconlo&,humsenior.org and 
Analyst: Larry Lboda 
Nurse: Vacant Nancy Conlon, Site Director 
Multipurpose Senior Se~ces Program 
Humboldt Senior Resource Center, Inc. 
19 10 California Street 
Eureka, California 9550 1 
02-23-2004 MSSP Site Roster 
SECTION NO.: 51346 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 291 DATE: 09/03/04 19D-44 
. . - . - . . . - . . . . . . . . . - - . - . . .

[page 74]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
10 CALIFORNIA STATE UN~RSITY, (530) 898-5082 FAX # (530) 898-4870 
CHICO (PSA 3) EMAIL: ahostette~csuchico.edu 
Analyst: Gloria Abemethy 
Nurse: Vacant 
Arlene Phalen Hostetter, Site Director 
Direct Line: (530) 898-61 91 
Arlene Phalen Hostetter, Site Director 
Multipurpose Senior Services Program 
Area Agency on Aging, PSA 3 
California State University, Chico 
2491 Carmichael Drive, suite 400 
Chico, California 95928-7 132 
1 1 SONOMA COUNTY AREA AGENCY (707) 565-5970 FAX # (707) 565-5957 
ON AGING (PSA 27) EMAIL: dkaiiian@schsd.org 
Analyst: Gloria Abernethy 
Nurse: Vacant 
Diane Kaljian, Site Director 
Direct Line: (707) 565-5932 
Diane Kaljian, Site Director 
Multipurpose Senior Services Program 
Sonoma County Area Agency on Aging -. 
P.O. Box 4059- 
Santa Rosa, California 95402-4059 
12 UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA, (916) 734-5432 FAX # (916) 454-3070 
DAVIS CARE MANAGEMENT (PSA 4) EMAIL: paula.bosler@ucdmc.ucdavis.edu 
Analyst: Gloria Abemethy 
Nurse: Sherry DeBarbieri 
Paula Bosler, Interim Site Director 
Direct Line: (91 6) 734-6043 
Paula Bosler, Interim Site Director 
Multipurpose Senior Services Program 
University of California, Davis Care Management 
3700 ~usiness Drive, Suite 130 
Sacramento, California 95820 
13 COUNTY OF SAN MATEO DEPT. OF (650) 573-3900 FAX # (650) 573-2310 
HEALTH SERVICES (PSA 8) EMAIL: pborrell~,co.sanmateo.ca.us 
Analyst: Wendy Pride Pam Bonelli, Site Director Nurse: Vacant MU~~~DU~DOS~ Senior Services Program 
Pam Borrelli, Site Director 
Direct Line: (650) 573-351 2 
Chris Rodriguez, Supervisor 
Direct Line: (650) 573-2703 
~~ing' 86 Adult Services Division - 
Department of Health Services. 
Countv of San Mateo 
P.O. Bbx 5892 
San Mateo, California 94403 
14 STANISLAUS COUNTY COMMUNITY (209) 558-2233 FAX # (209) 558-2681 
SERVICES AGENCY (PSA 30) EMAIL: Stamme~mai1.co.stanis1aus.ca.u~ 
Analyst: John Cummins 
Nurse: Vacant 
Egon Stammler, MSW, Site Director 
Direct Line: (209) 652-1 755 
Egon Stammler, MSW, Site Director 
Multipurpose Senior Services Program 
Stanislaus County 
Community Services Agency 
P.O. Box 42 
Modesto. California 95353-0042 
02-23-2004 MSSP Site Roster 3 
SECTION NO.: 51346 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 2 9 1 DATE: 09/03/04 19D-45

[page 75]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
15 COUNTY OF SANTA BARBARA (805) 346-8385 FAX # (805) 346-8386 
PUBLIC HEALTH DEPARTMENT (PSA 17) EMAIL: slindma@co.santa-barbara.ca.us 
Analyst: John Cummins 
Nurse: Sheny DeBarbieri 
Susan Lindman, Site Director 
Multipurpose Senior Services Program 
County of Santa Barbara 
Public Health Department 
2125 South Centerpointe Parkway 
Santa Maria, California 93455- 1340 
Santa Barbara Site Address: 
345 Carnino Del Remedio 
Third Floor, Building 4 
Santa Barbara, California 93 1 10 
(805) 68 1-5452 
16 HUNTINGTON MEMORUU, HOSPITAL (626) 397-31 10 FAX # (626) 397-2996 
(PSA 19) 
Analyst: Wendy Pride 
Nurse: Sherry DeBarbieri 
Eileen Koons, M.S.W., 
Director of Government Programs 
Direct Line: (626) 397-201 1 
Pager (626) 932-91 97 
Fax: (626) 397-2982 
Eileen Koons, M.S.W., 
Director of Government Programs 
Multipurpose Senior Services Program 
Senior Care Network 
Huntington Memorial Hospital 
837 South Fair Oaks Avenue, Suite 100 
Pasadena. California 9 11 05-26 19 
17 SAN BERNARDINO (PSA 20) (909) 89 1-9016 FAX # (909) 89 1-9039 
Analyst: Wendy Pride EMAIL: ceklun~~hss.sbcounty.pov 
Nurse: Sheny DeBarbieri 
Carl Eklund, Site Director 
Multipurpose Senior Services Program 
County of San Bernardino - East Valley 
Department of Aging and Adult Services 
Senior Home and Health Care 
686 E. Mill Street, Second Floor 
San Bernardino, California 924 15-0640 
18 COUNTY OF ORANGE (714) 825-3000 FAX # (714) 825-3155 
SOCIAL SERVICES AGENCY (PSA 22) EMAIL: cfon~ssa.co.orange.ca.us 
Analyst: Larry Leboda 
Nurse: Vacant 
Chrisy Fong, Site Director 
Direct Line: (71 4) 825-3 1 0 7 
Chrisy Fong, Site Director 
Multipurpose Senior Services Program 
Social Services Agency 
County of Orange 
P.O. Box 22006 
Santa Ana, California 92702-2006 
02-23-2004 MSSP Site Roster 4 
SECTION NO.: 51346 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 291 DATE: 09/03/04 19D-46

[page 76]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
20 COUNCIL ON AGING (408) 296-8290 FAX # (408) 243-4708 
OF SILICON VALLEY, INC. (PSA 10) EMAIL: mss~,scccoa.org 
Analyst: John Cummins 
Nurse: Vacant 
*Stephen M. Schmoll, Executive Director 
Council on Aging of Silicon Valley, Inc. 
2 1 15 The Alameda 
San Jose. California 95 126 
Trudi Stone, Site Director 
Multipurpose Senior Services Program 
Case Management Services 
Council on Aging of Silicon Valley, Inc. 
2 1 15 The Alameda 
San Jose, California 95126 
"Correspondence is addressed to S. Schmoll. 
2 1 FRESNO-MADERA AREA AGENCY (559) 453-4405 FAX # (559) 453-51 11 
ON AGING (PSA I 4) EMAIL: btrevarrowG!fmaaa.orq 
Analyst: Gloria Abemethy 
Nurse: Vacant 
Brian Trevarrow, Deputy Director 
Direct Line: (559) 488-3821 
Brian Trevarrow, Deputy Director 
Multipurpose Senior Services Program 
Fresno-Madera Area Agency on Aging 
2085 East Dakota Avenue 
Fresno, California 93726 
*2220 Tulare Street, Suite 1200 
Fresno, California 9372 1-2 106 
*Mail all "Correspondence" to this address. 
22 SAN JOAQUIN CO~NTY (PSA 1 1) (209) 468-2202 FAX # (209) 468-2207 
Analyst: Wendy Pride EMAIL: wmoor&co.san-ioaquin.ca.us 
Nurse: Sheny DeBarbien 
Wendy Moore, Site Director 
*Joseph E. Chelli. Director Multipurpose Senior Services Program 
San Joaquin County San Joaquin County 
Human Services Agency P.O. Box 201056 
P.O. Box 201056 Stockton, California 95201-3006 
Stockton, California 95201-3006 (209) 468-3805 
Direct Line: (209) 468- 1650 
Fax: (209) 468-1985 
*Correspondence is addressed to Joseph Chelli. 
23 IMPERIAL COUNTY WORK TRAINING (760) 352-6181 FAX # (760) 352-6332 
CENTER (PSA 24) EMAIL: jaalvarez@icwtc.org 
Analyst: John Cummins 
Nurse: Sheny DeBarbien Arnold Alvarez, Site Director 
Multipurpose Senior Services Program 
Imperial County Work Training Center, Inc. 
2 10 Wake Avenue 
El Centro, California 92243 
24 RIVERSIDE (PSA 21) (909) 697-4697 FAX # (909) 697-4667 
Analyst: Wendy Pride EMAIL: ewalsh@co.riverside.ca.us 
Nurse: Vacant 
Ed Walsh, Site Director 
Multipurpose Senior Services Program 
Riverside County Office on Aging 
6296 Rivercrest Drive, Suite K 
Ed Walsh, Site Director Riverside, California 92507 
Direct Line: (909) 697-4697, Ext. 229 
02-23-2004 MSSP Site Roster 5 
SECTION NO.: 51346 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 291 DATE: 09/03/04 19D-47

[page 77]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
25 GOLDEN UMBRELLA (PSA 2) (530) 223-6034 FAX # (530) 223-0658 
AKA: Redding EMAIL: mcalkin~chw.edu 
Analyst: Larry Leboda 
Nurse: Vacant Mark Calkins, Site Director 
Multipurpose Senior Services Program 
Golden Umbrella 
Mark Calkins, Site Director 2227 College View Drive 
Direct Line: (530) 226-3013 Redding, California 96003 
26 MARIN ~PSA 5) (415) 491-7960 FAX # (415) 472-7569 
Analyst: Gloria Abemethy 
Nurse: Sherry DeBarbieri 
Bernadette Sweeney, Site Director 
Direct Line: (4 1 5) 4 1 9-3602 
Bernadette Sweeney, Site Director 
Multipurpose Senior Services Program 
Seniors At Home 
Jewish Family and Children's Services 
600 Fifth Avenue 
San Rafael, California 9490 1 
27 CONTRA COSTA (PSA 7) (925) 335-8710 FAX # (925) 335-8738 
Analyst: Larry Leboda EMAIL: 1anders~ehsd.co.contra-c0sta.ca.u~ or 
Nurse: Sherry DeBarbieri 
Linda Anderson, Site Director 
Multipurpose Senior Services Program 
Contra Costa County Office on Aging 
2530 Arnold Drive, Suite 300 
Martinez, California 94553 
28 MERCED COUNTY (PSA 3 I) (209) 385-3000, Ext. 5200 
Analyst: Wendy Pride FAX # (209) 725-3988 
Nurse: Sherry DeBarbieri EMAIL: nvalton@hsa.co.merced.ca.us 
Richard Readel, MSW, Supervisor 
Direct Line: (209) 722-1 738, Ext. 31 67 
Fax #: (209) 725-3837 
Rhonda L. Walton, Deputy Director 
Multipurpose Senior Services Program 
Merced County Human Services Agency 
2 115 West Wardrobe Avenue 
P.O. Box 112 
Merced, California 9534 1-01 12 
29 COUNTY OF KERN (661) 868-1095 FAX # (661) 868-0921 
KERN COUNTY AGING AND ADULT EMAIL: gardenr@co.kern.ca.us 
SERVICES 
Analyst: Wendy Pride 
Nurse: Sherry DeBarbieri 
Robin Garden, Site Director 
Multipurpose Senior Services Program 
County of Kern 
Kern County Aging and Adult Services 
5357 Trwctun Avenue Extension 
Bakersfield, California 93309 
02-23-2004 MSSP Site Roster 6 
SECTION NO.: 51346 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 29 1 DATE: 09/03/04 19D-48

[page 78]
MEDbCAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
30 MONTEREY (PSA 32) (831) 755-3403 FAX # (831) 751-1729 
Analyst: Larry Leboda EWL: williamsa@co.monterev.ca.us 
Nurse: Vacant 
Andy Williams, Site Director 
Andy Williams, Site Director Multipurpose Senior Services Program 
Direct Line: (831) 755-3467 Monterey County Department of Social Services 
713 La Guardia Street, Suite A 
Margarita Robles Salinas, California 93905 
Fiscal Officer 
1000 S. Main Street, Suite 306 
Salinas, California 9390 1 
3 1 NAPA/SOLANO (PSA 28) (707) 644-6612 FAX # (707) 644-7905 
Analyst: Larry Leboda EMML: leanne@aaans.org 
Nurse: Vacant 
Leanne Martinsen, Executive Director 
Multipurpose Senior Services Program 
Kelly Hiramoto, LCSW, Supervisor Area Agency on Aging Serving Napa 86 Solano 
MSSPJLinkages Serving Napa & Solano 601 Sacramento Street, #I401 
Direct Line: (707) 643-51 70, Ext. 20 Vallejo, California 94590 
32 AREA 12 AGENCY ON AGING (PSA 12) (209) 532-6272 FAX # (209) 532-6501 
Analyst: Larry Leboda EMAIL: aemmemarea 12 .org 
Nurse: Sherry DeBarbieri 
Adam Emmer, Site Director 
Multipurpose Senior Services Program 
Area 12 Agency on Aging 
13975 Mono Way, Suite E 
Sonora, California 95370 
33 KINGS/TULARE (PSA 15) (559) 730-9921 FAX # (559) 624-1042 
Analyst: John Cummins EMAIL: epadill@,tularehhsa.org 
Nurse: Vacant 
Elissa Padilla, Site Director 
ELissa Padilla, Site Director Multipurpose Senior Services Program 
Phone Number & Ext: (559) 730-9921, Ext. 31 3 KingsITulare Area Agency on Aging 
3500 West Mineral King Avenue, Suite A 
Pamela Nelson, Supervisor Visalia, California 9329 1 
34 VENTURA (PSA 18) (805) 477-7300 FAX # (805) 477-7312 
Analyst: John Cummins ENLAIL: maryleu.~a~va~mail.co.ventura.ca.us 
Nurse: Sherry DeBarbieri 
Mary Leu Pappas, Site Director 
Multipurpose Senior Services Program 
County of Ventura Area Agency on Aging 
646 County Square Drive, Suite 100 
Ventura, California 93003-9086 
02-23-2004 MSSP Site Roster 7 
SECTION NO.: 51346 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 291 DATE: 09/03/04 19D-49

[page 79]
- -- 
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
Analyst: Gloria Abemethy EMAIL: iwconroy@co.el-dorad0.ca.u~ 
Nurse: Vacant 
Janet Walker-Conroy, Public Guardian, Director 
Janet Walker-Conroy, Public 'Guardian, Director Multipurpose Senior Services Program 
Direct Line: (530) 621-631 7 El Dorado County 
Accounting/Contract OKice Department of Community Services 
937 Spring Street 630 Main Street 
Placerville, California 95667 Placerville, California 95667 
Direct Line: (530) 621-61 65 
36  HE COUNTY OF YUBA (530) 749-6775 FAX # (530) 749-6244 - - - - - - - - 
(PSA 4) 
Analyst: Larry Leboda 
Nurse: Vacant 
Ginny Tuscano, Program Manager 
Direct Line: (530) 749-6 775 
Ginny Tuscano, Program Manager 
Multipurpose Senior Services Program 
Yuba County 
Health and Human Services Department 
6000 Lindhurst Avenue, Suite 700 C 
Marysville, California 95901 
Analyst: Gloria Abernethy 
Nurse: Vacant 
Mary Anne Mendall, Site Director 
Direct Line: (51 0) 574-2062 
Mary Anne Mendall, Site Director 
Multipurpose Senior Services Program 
City of Fremont 
3300 Capitol Avenue 
Fremont, California 94537-5006 
38 INYO-MONO AREA AGENCY ON (760) 873-6364 FAX # (760) 873-5103 
AGING (PSA 16) EMAIL: imaaa@snet.com 
Analyst: Larry Leboda Charles Broten, Director Nurse: Vacant Multipurpose Senior Services Program 
Inyo-Mono Area Agency on Aging 
P.O. Box 1799 
Bishop, California 9351 5 
39 HUMAN SERWCES ASSOCIATION (562) 806-5400 FAX # (562) 806-1006 
(PSA 19) EMAIL: darren.dunawav@hsala.org 
Analyst: Wendy F'ride 
Nurse: Sherry DeBarbieri Darren Dunaway, Senior Services Director 
Multipurpose Senior Services Program 
Human Services Association 
6800 Florence Avenue 
Bell Gardens, California 90201 
02-23-2004 MSSP Site Roster 8 
SECTION NO.: 51346 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 2 9 1 DATE: 09/03/04 19D-50

[page 80]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
40 PARTNERS IN CARE FOUNDATION (818) 526-1780, EXT. 108 
(PSA 19) FAX # (818) 526-1788 
Analyst: Wendy Pride EWL: jcook@vicf.org 
Nurse: Sherry DeBarbieri 
James Cook, Director 
Multipurpose Senior Services Program 
Partners In Care Foundation 
10 1 South First Street, Suite 1000 
Burbank, California 9 1502 
4 1 CALOPTIMA (PSA 22) (714) 246-8400 FAX # (714) 481-6536 
Analust: Law Leboda EMAIL: ipiilo@,calovtima.org 
NUT&: she& DeBarbieri 
Jim Pijloo, Site Director 
Direct Line: (71 4) 246-8 773 
Jim Pijloo, Site Director 
Multipurpose Senior Services Program 
CalOptima 
1120 West La Veta Avenue, Suite 200 
Orange, California 92868 
43 PARTNERS IN CARE FOUNDATION- (310) 632-9980 FAX # (310) 632-9984 
SOUTH (PSA 19) EWL: jcoo~~icf~org 
Analyst: Wendy Pride James Cook, Director Nurse: Sherry DeBarbien' Multipurpose Senior Services Program 
Partners In Care Foundation-South 
3737 E. Martin Luther King Jr. Boulevard Gretchen Washington, Supervisor Lynwood, California 90262 
02-23-2004 MSSP Site Roster 
SECTION NO.: 51346 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 29 1 DATE: 09/03/04 19D-51

[page 82]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
All County Letter MSSP Contact Names 
Orange' - contract ends 6130103. 
Partners in Care" - covers the WattsISouth Central LA area under a distinct wntracUoffice effective 4101103 
SECTION NO.: 51346 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 2 9 1 DATE: 09/03/04 19D-52

[page 84]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
Stale of WilanbUealth end Hmml Agency 
MEDI-CAL 
NOTICE OF ACTION 
APPROVAL OF BENEFITS 
MULTIPURPOSE SENIOR SERVICES 
PROGRAM WAIVER L 
(COW STAMP) 
Notice date: 
Case numbec 
Worker name: 
Wwker number: 
Worker telephone number: 
Office hours: 
Notice lor: 
The California Department of Aging's Medi-Cal Multipurpose Senior Services Program (MSSP) waiver 
provides extra services to persons 65 years of age or more who meet the MSSP requirements and 
who qualify for Medi-Cal under special deeming rules when they live with a spouse. 
0 You are entitled to full Medi-Cal benefits including case management services with no monthly 
cost beginning 
0 You are entitled to full Medi-Cal benefits including case management services beginning 
. Your monthly share-ofcost is $ 
In order to remain eligible for this program, you must: 
Report changes, such as your income, health insurance, living situation, medica condition, 
property, or your address within 10 days. 
Continue to meet the Department of Aging rules for this waiver. 
Provide any requested information. 
If you do not have a plastic Benefits Identification Card (BIC), you will receive one so( . Always 
show your BIC to your medical provider whenever you need care. This card is good as , ,lg as you 
are eligible for Medi-Cal. DO NOT THROW AWAY YOUR PLASTIC BIC. 
The statute that requires this action is Section 51 346, Title 22, California Code of Regulatio.:~. 
cc: Department of Aging 
-- -- -- - 
SECTION NO.: 51346 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 2 9 1 DATE: 09/03/04 19D-53

[page 85]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
Stated Cdilaib-HeWh and Hunan Wcet Agency ~eparvnenl d Health Services 
Mdi-W Pqrarn 
NOTIFICACION DE ACCION r 1 
DE MEDI-CAL 
APROBACION DE BENEFlClOS 
DE SERVICIOS DE EXTENSION PARA EL PROGRAMA 
DE SERVICIOS CON PROP~SITO M~~LTIPLE 
PARA LAS PERSONAS DE LA TERCERA EDAD L 
(COUNM STAMP) 
J 
Fecha de la notificaabn: 
Ntirnero del caso: 
Nornbre del trabajadw: 
Nurnero del trabajador: 
Nurnero de tel6fono del trabajador: 
J Horas hAbiles: 
Notilicad6n para: 
Los Servicios de Extension para el Programa de Medi-Cal de Servicios con Proposito M~jltiple para 
las Personas de la Tercera Edad (Medi-Cal Multipurpose Senior Services Program-MSSP) del 
Departamento para las Personas de la Tercera Edad de California, proporciona servicios adicionales 
para las personas de 65 aiios de edad, o mayores, quienes cumplan con 10s requisitos del MSSF: y 
reunan 10s requisitos para recibir beneficios de Medi-Cal, bajo las reglas de consideracibn especial, 
cuando vivan con un(a) conyuge. 
0 Usted tiene derecho a recibir beneficios cornpletos de Medi-Cal, incluyendo 10s servicios de 
administracion del caso, sin costo mensual, a partir del 
0 Usted tiene derecho a recibir beneficios cornpletos de Medi-Cal, incluyendo 10s servicios de 
administracion del caso, a partir del . Su parte del costo mensual 
es de $ 
Para continuar reuniendo 10s requisitos para este programa, usted tiene que: 
Reportar, en un plazo de 10 dias, cualquier cambio, como por ejemplo, en sus ingresos, seguro 
medico, situacion en el hogar, condicion medica, propiedad o su direccion. 
. Continuar cumpliendo con las reglas para estos servicios de exfensibn, establezidas por el 
Departamento para las Personas de la Tercera Edad. 
. Proporcionar cualquier inforrnacion solicitada. 
Si usted no tiene una Tarjeta de Identificacibn de Beneficios de plastic0 (Benefits I entification 
CarGBIC), pronto recibira una. Siempre presente su BIC a su proveedor medico, crda vez que 
necesite atencion. Esta tarjeta es valida, mientras usted reuna 10s requisitos para reci! Ir beneficios 
de Medi-Cal. NO TIRE SU TARJETA BtC DE P~STICO. 
El estatuto que requiere esta accion se establece en la Seccion 51346, del Titulo 22, del Codigo de 
Regulaciones de California. 
cc: Departamento para las Personas de la Tercera Edad 
- 
SECTION NO.: 51346 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 2 9 1 DATE: 09/03/04 19D-54

[page 86]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL - 
Sgte o(CSiani8--He& and Hum= Swvices Ageocy C€$@mmdHeaMlService, 
MedCCal Program 
MEDI-CAL 
NOTICE OF ACTION r 7 
DENIAL OR DISCONTINUANCE OF BENEFITS 
MULTIPURPOSE SENIOR SERVICES 
PROGRAM WAIVER L 
(COUNTY STAMP) 
_I 
1 Notice date: 
Case numbec 
Worker name: 
Worker number: 
Worker telephone number: 
_I Office hours: 
Notice lor: 
The California Department of Aging's Medi-Cal Multipurpose Senior Services Program (MSSP) 
Waiver provides extra services to persons 65 years of age or more who meet the MSSP requirements 
and who qualify for Medi-Cal under special deeming rules when they live with a spouse. 
0 Your benefits under this program will be discontinued effective the last day of 
0 Your application date of is denied. 
Here islare the reason(s) why: 
0 Your property is over the limit of 
0 The Department of Aging has informed us that you are no longer eligible for waiver services. 
0 You are no longer living in the home with your spouse. 
0 Other: 
DO NOT THROW AWAY YOUR PLASTIC BENEFITS IDENTIFICATION CARD (BIC). You can use it 
again if you become eligible or are eligible for another Medi-Cal program. 
The statute that requires this action is Section 51 346, Title 22, California Code of Regulations. 
cc: Department of Aging 
MC RRR I17MI 
SECTION NO.: 51346 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 291 DATE: 09/03/04 19D-55

[page 87]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
Sla(ed Cddms-Hem and Human Semte Agm Departmen1 d Healln SeMces 
Me-&! Prqram 
NOTIFICAC~ON DE ACCION 
DE MEDI-CAL r 7 
NEGAC~~N 0 SUSPENS~ON DE BENEFlClOS 
DE SERVlClOS DE EXTENSI~N PARA EL PROGRAMA 
DE SERVlClOS DE PROP~SITO M~~LTIPLE PARA 
LAS PERSONAS DE LA TERCERA EDAD L 
(COUNTY STAMP) 
_J 
7 Fecha de la notilcac~on: 
Nljrnero del caso: 
Nornbre del trabajador: 
Nurnero del trabajador: 
Nurnero de telbfono del trabajador: 
A Horas hbbiles: 
Notificacih para: 
Los Servicios de Extension para el Programa de Medi-Cal de Servicios con Proposito Multiple para 
las Personas de la Tercera Edad (Medi-Cal Multipurpose Senior Services Program-MSSP) del 
Departamento para las Personas de la Tercera Edad de California, proporciona servicios adicionales 
para las personas de 65 afios de edad, o mayores, quienes cumplan con 10s requisitos del MSSt? y 
reunan 10s requisitos para recibir beneficios de Medi-Cal, bajo las reglas de consideracion especial, 
cuando vivan con un(a) conyuge. 
0 Sus beneficios bajo este programa seran suspendidos, efectivo a partir del ultimo dia 
de 
0 Su fecha de solicitud del ha sido denegada. 
A continuacion se enumera(n) la(s) razon/razones del por que: 
TJ Su propiedad sobrepasa el limite de 
0 El Departamento para las Personas de la Tercera Edad nos ha informado que usted ya no reline 
10s requisitos para 10s servicios de la extension. 
0 Usted ya no esta viviendo en el hogar, con su conyuge. 
0 Otro: 
NO TIRE SU TARJETA DE IDENTIFICACI~N DE BENEFlClOS DE PLASTICO (BENEFITS 
lDENT/FlCATlON CARD-BIC). Usted puede volver a usarla, si llega a reunir 10s requisitos, o si 
rehe 10s requisitos para otro programa de Medi-Cal. 
El estatuto que requiere esta accion se establece en la Seccion 51346, del Titulo 22, del Codigo de 
Regulaciones de California. 
cc: Departamento para las Personas de la Tercera Edad 
MC 366 (SPI (rm2) 
SECTION NO.: 51346 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 2 9 1 DATE: 09/03/04 190-56

[page 88]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
state 01 Calmla-HeaRh and Human S- Agency 
CALIFORNIA DEPARTMENT OF AGING (CDA) 
WAIVER REFERRAL 
Department d Heanh Services 
Me%- Prv 
Worker name Woiker number 
Multipurpose Senior Services Program (MSSP) site: Please complete this portion and forward to the 
appropriate County Waiver contact person. 
Name of applicant 
I 
Guardian (if applicable) 
1 
Address (number, street) 
Social securrty number 
Status 
Sate Chy 
Date ol birth 
17 New Medi-Cal applicant. 
ZIP code 
Address of guardtan (if ddlerenl) (number, street) 
CJ Currently receives Medi-Cal with a share-of-cost. 
Telephone 
C~Y Sate 
Living Arrangement 
ZIP code 
CJ The applicant is currently in an institution. Please determine Medi-Cal eligibility based on hislher 
anticipated return to the community. Anticipated date of discharge: 
0 The applicant is currently living in the home. 
0 Other: 
Eligibility Determination 
If applicantlbeneficiary is living or will live at home with hislher spouse and is property eligible and 
entitled to zero share-of-cost Medi-Cal under regular eligibility rules, spousal impoverishment rules 
are not utilized. If the applicantlbeneficiary is property ineligible or has a share-of-cost, apply spousal 
impoverishment income and resource rules (i.e., institutional deeming rules) even if the 
applicantlbeneficiary lives in the home. See Article 19D of the Medi-Cal Eligibility Procedures 
Manual. 
This is to certify that the individual named above has met the admission criteria for a nursing facility 
as defined in the California Code of Regulations, Title 2, Division 3, Subdivision 1, Chapter 3, 
Article 4, Sections 5 1334 and 51 335. 
Signature of MSSP sole contacl person 
NOTE TO COUNTY: Please send a copy of the Notice of Action to the MSSP site when the deteminalion is compleled. 
Printed name of MSSP site contact person 
MSSP sne address (number, street) 
White: County Copy 
MC 3M 112021 
Yellow: MSSP Site Copy 
Tnle 
clv 
SECTION NO.: 51346 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 2 9 1 DATE:09/03/04 19D-57 
Telephone 
( 
Sate 
) 
ZIP code

[page 89]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 State of California – Health and Human Services Agency                                                                Department of Health Care Services 
David Maxwell-Jolly, Director                                                                                                           Medi-Cal Program 
 
 
         
County Return Address NOTICE OF ACTION 
APPROVAL OF ENROLLMENT IN  
ASSISTED LIVING WAIVER WITH MEDI-CAL 
CHANGES FOR BENEFICIARY 
 
Notice date:  ___________________________ 
Case number:  _________________________ 
Worker name:  _________________________ 
 
 
 
Worker number:  _______________________ 
Worker telephone number:  ______________ 
Office hours:  __________________________ 
Notice for:  ____________________ 
 
Medi-Cal Recipient Address Box 
 
 
 
 
 
You have been approved for enrollment into the Assisted Living (AL) Waiver and your       
Medi-Cal coverage will change as described below.  
 
 You are eligible for the AL Waiver and because special AL waiver rules were applied, you 
are eligible for Medi-Cal without a share-of-cost beginning _________________. 
 
    Because you have a Community Spouse, special AL Waiver deeming rules apply.  
 
Your Community Spouse Resource Allowance is $ _____________ and it is the m
aximum 
amount of property which your community spouse may keep in 
his/her own name.  This amount is based upon the greatest of:  the standard amount, an 
amount awarded by court order, or an amount awarded by a fair hearing. PLEASE NOTE:  
To remain eligible for Medi-Cal you must not have any excess property. You have until 
_________________ to transfer all of your net countable property, except for the $2,000 you 
are allowed to retain, into the name of the Community Spouse.  After this date, you must 
have no more than $2,000 worth of net countable property held in your name. 
 
 
 
Your spousal income allocation that you are allowed to give to your spouse is  
SECTION NO.: 51346      MANUAL LETTER NO.: 307     DATE: 12/10/09        19D-57.1

[page 90]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
 
 
 
 
 
SECTION NO.: 51346      MANUAL LETTER NO.: 307     DATE: 12/10/09        19D-57.2 
$ ______________.  If you decide not to give this amount to your spouse, you must tell your 
eligibility worker within 10 days.  This may affect your eligibility or share-of-cost. 
 
If you or your spouse are dissatisfied with the calculation of the Community Spouse 
Resource Allowance, the determination of ownership or availability of property, or the 
spousal income allocation, either or both of you have the right to request a fair hearing.  Any 
fair hearing on the calculation of the Community Spouse Resource Allowance must be held 
within 30 days from the date of the request for the hearing.  See the reverse side of this notice 
for directions on how to request a fair hearing.  
 
The AL Waiver is limited to individuals eligible for Medi-Cal without a Medi-Cal share-of-
cost who instead wish to live in a residential care provider site for the elderly or in publicly 
funded senior and/or disabled housing.  Such individuals must have sufficient funds to pay 
for their board and room and care and supervision, with some funds remaining to meet 
personal and incidental needs. In determining Medi-Cal eligibility for individuals who are 
applying for enrollment into the AL Waiver, AL Waiver rules are used, including special AL 
waiver deeming rules for most married persons.   
 
 You do not have to fill out monthly or quarterly status reports for Medi-Cal. 
 You must report to your Medi-Cal worker within 10 days if there are any changes in your 
income, property, medical                                                                                                                       
conditions, household situation, or living conditions.  
 You will have to complete a form for your Medi-Cal annual review. 
 
Always present your Benefits Identification Card (BIC) to your medical provider whenever you 
need care.  This card is good for as long as you are eligible for Medi-Cal.  DO NOT THROW 
AWAY YOUR BIC.   
 
This action is required by Welfare and Institutions Code Section 14132.26.  
 
If you have any questions, ask your worker.   
 
State Hearing:  If you think this action is wrong, you can ask for a hearing.  The back of this 
page tells you how.  
 
cc:  AL Waiver liaison DHCS Monitoring and Oversight Section 
MC 240

[page 91]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
 
 
 
 
 
                  
State of California – Health and Human Services Agency                                                             Department of Health Care Services 
David Maxwell-Jolly, Director                                                                                                        Medi-Cal Program 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                MEDI-CAL 
      NOTICE OF ACTION 
DENIAL OF ENROLLMENT IN 
ASSISTED LIVING WAIVER AND/OR MEDI-CAL 
 
Notice date:  ___________________________ 
Case number:  _________________________ 
Worker name:  _________________________ 
Worker number:  _______________________ 
Worker telephone number:  _______________ 
Office hours:  __________________________ 
   Medi-Cal Recipient Address Box 
 
                                                                                                                                :   
 
 
County Return Address 
 
Your request for enrollment into the Assisted Liv
ing (AL) Waiver has been denied.   Here’s why.  
 
     You do not have sufficient funds to meet the costs of assisted living because you have a 
share-of-cost under regular Medi-Cal rules that is based on net countable income of  
$____________________.   
 
    We then used special AL Waiver rules and found you still would have a share of cost.  If 
you are married with a community spouse, you were allowed a spousal income allocation of $ 
________________ in this determination.  Your net countable income and share-of-cost have 
been calculated as follows.  
 
 
 
     You are not eligible for Medi-Cal even when we used special AL Waiver deeming rules 
because your property exceeds the Medi-Cal limit of $ ______________.    If you are married 
with a community spouse, you were allowed a Community Spouse Resource Allowance of $ 
_________________  that was based on the greatest of: the standard amount, an amount 
awarded by court order, or an amount awarded by a fair hearing. Your excess property was 
calculated as follows: 
 
The net countable property held in the name of your community spouse: 
 
SECTION NO.: 51346      MANUAL LETTER NO.: 307     DATE: 12/10/09        19D-57.3

[page 92]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
 
 
 
 
 
SECTION NO.: 51346      MANUAL LETTER NO.: 307     DATE: 12/10/09        19D-57.4 
 I T E M           V A L U E  
 
_____________________________________   ______________________ 
_____________________________________   ______________________ 
_____________________________________   ______________________ 
 
The net countable property held in your name: 
 
 I T E M           V A L U E  
 
_____________________________________   ______________________ 
 
_____________________________________   ______________________ 
 
_____________________________________   ______________________ 
 
The net countable property held in both of your names: 
 
 I T E M           V A L U E  
 
_____________________________________   ______________________ 
 
_____________________________________   ______________________ 
 
_____________________________________   ______________________ 
 
Total net countable property                                                      ______________________ 
 
Minus your  Community Spouse Resource               - ______________________ 
Allowance.  (This is the amount the community spouse                                                                            
may keep in his/her own name.)                                                       
 
Subtotal        ______________________ 
 
Minus the property limit for one person  
(This is the amount you may keep in your own name.)              -  2,000 
 
Amount of excess property              $  ________________ 
 
To be eligible for Medi-Cal you must not have any excess property by the last day of the 
month in which you apply for Medi-Cal benefits.  You have $ _______________ worth of 
excess property and you are ineligible for Medi-Cal benefits unless you spenddown your 
excess property by the end of the month.

[page 93]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
 
 
 
 
 
SECTION NO.: 51346      MANUAL LETTER NO.: 307     DATE: 12/10/09        19D-57.5 
    Other   _______________________________________________________. 
 
If you or your spouse are dissatisfied with the calculation of the Community Spouse Resource 
Allowance, the determination of ownership or availability of property, or the spousal income 
allocation, either or both of you have the right to request a fair hearing.  Any fair hearing on the 
calculation of the Community Spouse Resource Allowance must be held within 30 days from the 
date of the request for the hearing.  See the reverse side of this notice for directions on how to 
request a fair hearing. 
 
IMPORTANT INFORMATION IF THIS NOTICE IS A DENIAL BECAUSE OF EXCESS 
PROPERTY AND YOU HAVE UNPAID MEDICAL BILLS:  The MC 007 tells you about how 
this denial will be stopped if you use all of your excess property by paying medical bills that you 
owed during the month when you applied for Medi-Cal or after. This will not work if you wait 
more than three years.  Ask your eligibility worker for an MC 007.  
 
The Assisted Living Waiver is limited to individuals eligible for Medi-Cal without a Medi-Cal 
share-of-cost who require nursing provider site A or B level of care but who instead wish to live 
in a residential care provider site for the elderly or in publicly funded senior and/or disabled 
housing.  Such individuals must have sufficient funds to pay for their board and room and care 
and supervision, with some funds remaining to meet personal and incidental needs.  In 
determining Medi-Cal eligibility of applicants who are applying for enrollment into the AL 
Waiver, AL waiver rules were used.    
 
This action is required by Welfare and Institutions Code Section 14132.26.  
 
If you have any questions, ask your worker.   
 
State Hearing:  If you think this action is wrong, you can ask for a hearing.  The back of this 
page tells you how.  
 
cc:  AL WAIVER liaison DHCS Home and Community-Based Services Branch  
MC   242

[page 94]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
             
 
State of California – Health and Human Services Agency                                                             Department of Health Care Services 
David Maxwell-Jolly, Director                                                                                                       Medi-Cal Program 
 
 
 
 
MEDI-CAL 
NOTICE OF ACTION 
APPROVAL OF ENROLLMENT IN  
ASSISTED LIVING WAIVER     
AND INITIAL MEDI-CAL   
SECTION NO.: 51346      MANUAL LETTER NO.: 307     DATE: 12/10/09        19D-57.6 
 
Medi-Cal Recipient Address Box 
Notice date:  ___________________________ 
Case number:  _________________________ 
Worker name:  _________________________ 
Worker number:  _______________________ 
Worker telephone number:  _______________ 
Office hours:  __________________________ 
Notice for:  ________________________  
County Return Address
 
 
You have been approved for enrollment into the Assisted Living (AL) Waiver and for Medi-Cal 
coverage as follows using AL waiver rules.  
 
     You are eligible for the AL Waiver and for Medi-Cal beginning _____________________ . 
 
      Because you have a Community Spouse, special AL Waiver deeming rules apply.  
 
Your Community Spouse Resource Allowance is $ _____________ and it is the maximum 
amount of property which your community spouse may keep in his/her own name.  This amount 
is based upon the greatest of:  the standard amount, an amount awarded by court order, or an 
amount awarded by a fair hearing. PLEASE NOTE:  To remain eligible for Medi-Cal you must 
not have any excess property. You have until _________________ to transfer all of your net 
countable property, except for the $2,000 you are allowed to retain, into the name of the 
Community Spouse.  After this date, you must have no more than $2,000 worth of net 
nonexempt property held in your name. 
 
Your spousal income allocation that you are allowed to give to your spouse is $ 
______________.  If you decide not to give this amount to your spouse, you must tell your 
eligibility worker within 10 days.  This may affect your eligibility or share-of-cost.  
 
If you or your spouse are dissatisfied with the calculation of the Community Spouse Resource 
Allowance, the determination of ownership or availability of property, or the spousal income 
allocation, either or both of you have the right to request a fair hearing.  Any fair hearing on the 
calculation of the Community Spouse Resource Allowance must be held within 30 days from the

[page 95]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
 
 
 
 
 
SECTION NO.: 51346      MANUAL LETTER NO.: 307     DATE: 12/10/09        19D-57.7 
date of the request for the hearing.  See the reverse side of this notice for directions on how to 
request a fair hearing. 
 
The AL Waiver is limited to individuals eligible for Medi-Cal without a Medi-Cal share-of-cost 
who instead wish to live in a residential care provider site for the elderly or in publicly funded 
senior and/or disabled housing.  Such individuals must have sufficient funds to pay for their 
board and room and care and supervision, with some funds remaining to meet personal and 
incidental needs.  In determining Medi-Cal eligibility of applicants who are applying for 
enrollment into the AL Waiver, AL Waiver rules are used, including special deeming rules for 
most married persons.   
 
 You do not have to fill out monthly or quarterly status reports for Medi-Cal. 
 You must report to your Medi-Cal worker within 10 days if there are any changes in your 
income, property, medical conditions, household situation, or living conditions.  
 You will have to complete a form for your Medi-Cal annual review. 
 
Always present your Benefits Identification Card (BIC) to your medical provider whenever you 
need care.  This card is good for as long as you are eligible for Medi-Cal.  DO NOT THROW 
AWAY YOUR BIC.   
 
This action is required by Welfare and Institutions Code Section 14132.26.  
 
If you have any questions, ask your worker.   
 
State Hearing:  If you think this action is wrong, you can ask for a hearing.  The back of this 
page tells you how.  
 
cc:  AL Waiver liaison DHCS Monitoring and Oversight Section 
MC   241

[page 96]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
 
 
 
 
 
SECTION NO.: 51346      MANUAL LETTER NO.: 307     DATE: 12/10/09        19D-57.8 
REFERRAL FORM FOR THE ASSISTED LIVING (AL) WAIVER  
                                                                                                                              
                                                                                                
                                         Date: ___________ 
 
To:    ______________________________  ( AL Waiver contact)       __________________ County 
     Phone Number  
 
From:  _______________________________   Department of Care Health Services Monitoring and 
Oversight Section.       
Phone: _______________________________     e mail:  _________________________ 
Fax___________________________                                     
 
This notice concerns the individual named below.  
 
Individual: ____________________________________              Case Name: 
___________________________ 
 
Address: _____________________________________     City/State: 
_____________________________ 
 
Zip Code: ____________________________________      Social Security Number: 
____________________ 
 
Date of Birth: ______________________                                    Telephone Number: 
______________________ 
 
This individual   
   
□  has been screened as medically eligible for the AL Waiver ,   
□  will be disenrolled from the AL Waiver as of ______________________. 
 
County Instructions:   
 
    This individual is already eligible for no-cost Medi-Cal, no new determination is needed, and this form 
does not need to be returned to the Monitoring and Oversight Section.  This referral form is to inform the 
county that this individual is already or will be moving to assisted living on ________________.  
 
 
   Please determine Medi-Cal eligibility for the above individual and then e mail or fax this form to:    
 
 
 
 
Results of county determination: 
 
          If the above individual is enrolled in the AL Waiver,  he/she will be eligible for Medi-Cal with 
 
            no share-of-cost                a Medi-Cal share-of-cost of   $ ___________________________.  
 
 Special AL Waiver rules were used in this determination:     □  Yes               □  No

[page 97]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
 
 
 
 
 
SECTION NO.: 51346      MANUAL LETTER NO.: 307     DATE: 12/10/09        19D-57.9 
     
      Net nonexempt income was calculated as follows:   
 
 
 
       The above individual is ineligible for Medi-Cal even when AL Waiver rules are applied because 
_________________________________________________________________.   
 
 
County Instructions Once This Form is Returned by DHCS: 
 
 DHCS will be enrolling the above individual in the AL Waiver effective 
___________________________.  Please report his/her Medi-Cal eligibility to MEDS beginning with 
this month and also report any 3-month retroactive eligibility using regular Medi-Cal rules.  
 
 DHCS will not be enrolling the above individual in the AL Waiver because 
 
  he/she has a share of cost under regular Medi -Cal and would have a share of cost even if 
enrolled in the AL waiver.  
  other: ___________________________________ 
 
 DHCS will be disenrolling the above individual from the AL Waiver because 
_________________________________________________.  Please redetermine his/her Medi-Cal 
eligibility without using AL Waiver rules.  Note:  This individual may have a change in his/her living 
arrangement.

[page 99]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
- - - 
COUNTY WAIVER CONTACTS 
March 2004 
CONTACT COUNTY 
Joyce Cooper 
Social Services Agency 
11 06 Madison Street, Suite 307 
Oakland, CA 9461 2 
(510) 267-9442 
(510) 267-9428 FAX 
Regina Britschgi 
Health and Human Services 
75-A Diamond Valley Road 
Markleeville, CA 96120 
(530) 694-2235 
(530) 694-2252 FAX 
Kim Crippen 
Department of Social Services 
1003 Broadway 
Jackson, CA 95642 
(209) 223-6569 
(209) 223-6208 FAX 
Gigi Gilbert 
Department of Social Welfare 
42 County Center Drive 
P.O. Box 1649 
Oroville, CA 94965 
(530) 538-5149 
(530) 538-691 8 FAX 
Connie McLain 
Department of Social Welfare 
891 Mountain Ranch Road 
San Andreas, CA 95249 
(209) 754-6444 
(209) 754-6566 FAX 
Nancy Montgomery 
Department of Health 
and Human Services 
Colusa, CA 95932 
(91 6) 458-4985 
(916) 458-5771 FAX 
Alameda 
Alpine 
Butte 
Calaveras 
Colusa 
SECTION NO.: 51346 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 291 DATE: 09/03/04 19D-58

[page 100]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
COUNTY WAIVER CONTACTS 
March 2004 
CONTACT COUNTY 
Sandy Baldwin Contra Costa 
Medi-Cal Program Analyst 
Employment and Human Services Department 
40 Douglas Drive 
Martinez. CA 94553 
(925) 313-1621 
(925) 313-1758 FAX 
email: sbaldwin@ehsd.co.contracosta.ca.us 
Carmen Chavez Del Norte 
Department of Health and Social Services 
880 Northwest Drive 
Crescent City, CA 95531 
(707) 464-3191 
(707) 465-1 783 FAX 
Midge Mortensen 
Department of Social Services 
3057 Briw Road 
Placerville, CA 95684 
(530) 642-71 59 
(530) 626-9060 FAX 
Karen Sebilian 
Department of Employment and 
Temporary Assistance 
4449 East Kings Canyon 
Fresno, CA 93750-0001 
(559) 253-91 77 . 
(559) 253-9250 FAX 
Becky Hansen 
Human Resources 
P.O. Box 61 1 
Willows, CA 95988 
(530) 934-6514 
(530) 934-6521 FAX 
Mary McCutcheon 
Department of Social Services 
929 Koster Street 
Eureka, CA 95501 
(707) 268-2785 
Dora Juslin 
Department of Social Services 
2995 South 4th Street, Suite 105 
El Centro, CA 92243 
(760) 337-6800 
(760) 337-5716 FAX 
El Dorado 
Fresno 
Glenn 
Hum boldt 
Imperial 
SECTION NO.: 51346 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 29 1 DATE: 09/03/04 19D-59

[page 101]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
COUNTY WAIVER CONTACTS 
March 2004 
CONTACT COUNTY 
Candy Ross 
Health and Human Services 
914 North Main Street 
Bishop, CA 93514 
(760) 872-1 394 
Barbara Gause or Donna Dunkin 
Department of Human Services 
P.O. Box 51 1 
Bakersfield, CA 93302 
(661) 631-6094 
(661) 633-7047 FAX 
Aida Guzman 
Human Services Agency 
1200 South Drive 
Hanford, CA 93230 
(559) 582-3241 EXT. 4793 
FAX 584-2749 
Beverly Mangue 
Department of Social Services 
15975 Anderson Ranch Parkway 
P.O. Box 9000 
Lower Lake. CA 95457 
(707) 995-4262 
(707) 995-4204 FAX 
Mary Polley 
Welfare Department 
P.O. Box 1359 
Susanville, CA 96130 
(530) 251-8148 
Rene Lima 
Department of Public Social Services 
12900 Crossroads Parkway South 
City of Industry, CA 91 745 
(562) 908-3529 
(562) 908-0593 FAX 
Candy Lopez 
Department of Public Welfare 
Madera County 
P.O. Box 569 
Madera, CA 93639 
(559) 675-2364 
(559) 675-7693 FAX 
lnyo 
Kern 
Kings 
Lake 
Lassen . 
Los Angeles 
Madera 
-3- 
- - 
SECTION NO.: 51346 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 291 DATE:og/03/04 19D-60 
. . - - -. . . - - - - . . . . - . . - . -

[page 102]
MEDI-CAL ELlGlBlLlN PROCEDURES MANUAL 
. . 
COUNTY WAIVER CONTACTS 
March 2004 
CONTACT COUNTY 
Pat McCormack 
Department of Health 
and Human Services 
P.O. Box 4160 
120 N Redwood Drive, Rm 316 
San Rafael, CA 9491 3 
(41 5) 473-3547 
(41 5) 473-3556 FAX 
Becky Bradshaw 
Department of Social Services 
P.O. Box 7 
Mariposa, CA 95338 
(209) 966-3609 
(209) 966-5943 FAX 
Nancy Naumann 
Department of Social Services 
P.O. Box 1060 
Ukiah, CA 95482 
(707) 463-7828 
(707) 463-7859 FAX 
Mary Ellen Arana 
Human Services Agency 
21 15 West Wardrobe Avenue 
Merced, CA 95341-001 
(209) 385-3000 EXT. 5488 
(209) 725-3583 FAX 
Pat Wood 
Department of Social Services 
120 North Main Street 
Alturas, CA 96101 
(530) 233-6501 
Julie Timerman 
Department of Social Services 
P.O. Box 2969 
Mammoth Lakes, CA 93546 
(760) 934-351 1 
(760) 924-5431 FAX 
Mariposa 
Mendocino 
Merced 
Modoc 
Mono 
Yvette Grimes Monterey 
Department of Social Services 
1000 South Main Street, Suite 208 
Salinas, CA 93901 
(831) 755-4407 
(831) 755-8408 FAX 
- -- 
SECTION NO.: 51346 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 2 9 1 DATE:09/03/04 19D-61

[page 103]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
COUNTY WAIVER CONTACTS 
March 2004 
CONTACT COUNTY 
Darlene Washbum 
Health and Human Services 
2261 Elm Street 
Napa, CA 94559-3721 
(707) 253-4468 
Cindy Lackey 
Human Services Agency 
P.O. Box 1210 
Nevada City, CA 95959 
(530) 265-1 379 
(530) 265-7062 FAX 
Maria Hernandez 
Social Services Agency 
888 North Main Street, Suite 158C 
Santa Ana, CA 92701 
(714) 541-7805 
(71 4) 245-61 88 FAX 
Laurie Rodman 
Welfare Department 
100 Stonehouse Court 
Roseville, CA 95678 
(916) 784-6079 
(91 6) 784-61 00 FAX 
Virgina Ekonen 
Department of Social Services 
P.O. Box 360 
Quincy, CA 95971 
(530) 283-6441 
(530) 283-6368 FAX 
Sue de Jonckheere 
Department of Public Social Services 
1605 Sp~ce Street 
Riverside, CA 92507 
(909) 358-3992 
(909) 358-3990 FAX 
Jennifer SipelFred Tam 
Department of Social Services 
2433 Marconi Avenue 
Sacramento, CA 95821 
(916) 875-3731 
(916) 875-3591 FAX 
Alma Villasana 
Human Services Agency 
11 11 San Felipe Road, Suite 206 
Hollister, CA 95023 
(831) 636-4180 
Napa 
Nevada 
Orange 
Placer 
Plurnas 
Riverside 
Sacramento 
San Benito 
SECTION NO.: 51346 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 2 9 1 DATE: 09/03/04 19D-62

[page 104]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
COUNTY WAIVER CONTACTS 
March 2004 
CONTACT COUNTY 
Candice Karpinen San Bernardino 
Department of Public Social Services 
150 South Lena Road 
San Bernardino, CA 9241 5-051 5 
(909) 388-0280 
(909) 338-0281 FAX 
Suzette St. Pierre San Diego 
Department of Health and Human Services 
8840 Complex Drive, Suite 255 
San Diego, CA 92123-1423 
(858) 565-5029 
(858) 565-31 83 FAX 
Mary Adrian San Francisco 
Department of Human Services 
P.O. Box 7988 
San Francisco, CA 94120 
(415) 558-1951 
(415) 558-1841 FAX 
Diane Luis 
Human Services Agency 
P.O. Box 201056 
Stockton, CA 95202 
(209) 468-1 153 
(209) 468-1 985 FAX 
Christina Chow 
Department of Social Services 
3433 South Higuera Street 
P.O. Box 81 19 
San Luis Obispo, CA 93403-81 19 
(805) 781-1897 
(805) 781 -1 846 FAX 
Lorena Gonzalez 
Department of Social Services 
400 Harbor Boulevard, Building C 
Belmont, CA 94002 
(605) 595-7570 
(605) 595-7576 FAX 
Mysty Bonner 
Department of Social Services 
1 100 West Laurel 
Lompoc, CA 93436 
(805) 737-7056 
Janette Anastacio 
Department of Social Services 
333 West Julian Street, 5' Floor 
San Jose, CA 951 10-2335 
(408) 491 -6700 
(408) 975-4530 FAX 
San Joaquin 
San Luis Obispo 
San Mateo 
Santa Barbara 
Santa Clara 
SECTION NO.: 51346 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 2 g 1 DATE: 09/03/04 19D-63

[page 105]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
- 
COUNTY WAIVER CONTACTS 
March 2004 
CONTACT COUNTY 
Nan Toy 
Human Resources Agency 
P.O. Box 1320 
Santa Cruz, CA 95061 
(408) 454-41 42 
(408) 454-4092 FAX 
Janet Wright 
Department of Social Services 
P.O. Box 6005 
Redding, CA 96099-6005 
(91 6) 245-6464 
(91 6) 225-5087 FAX 
Lori Wright 
Human Services 
P.O. Box 1019 
Loyalton. CA 961 18 
(530) 993-6725 
(530) 993-6767 FAX 
Collette Thornton 
Human Services Department 
818 South Main Street 
Yreka, CA 96097 
(530) 841-2708 
(530) 841 -2791 FAX 
Santa Cruz 
Shasta 
Sierra 
Siskiyou 
Diana Perez 
Health and Social Services 
275 Beck Ave MS 5-130 
P.O.Box 5050 
Fairfield, CA 94533-6804 
(707) 784-871 5 
(707) 432-3548 FAX 
dperez@solanocountv.com 
Kim Seamans Sonoma 
Human Services Department 
2550 Paulin Drive 
P.O. Box 1539 
Santa Rosa, CA 95402 
(707) 565-5304 
(707) 565-5353 FAX 
Mary Michael 
Department of Social Services 
P.O. Box 42 
Modesto, CA 95353-0042 
(209) 558-2525 
(209) 558-21 89 FAX 
Stanislaus 
- 
SECTION NO.: 51346 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 2 9 1 DATE: 09/03/04 191)-64 
. . . . . . - . - . . .

[page 106]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
COUNTY WAIVER CONTACTS 
March 2004 
CONTACT COUNTY 
Denise Damm 
Department of Welfare 
and Social Services 
P.O. Box 1535 
Yuba City, CA 95992-1 535 
(530) 882-7230 EXT. 218 
(530) 882-721 2 FAX 
Bobbie Stillwell 
Department of Social Services 
P.O. Box 1515 
Red Bluff, CA 96080 
(530) 528-4081 
(530) 528-5410 FAX 
Marilyn Blackburn 
Department of Health 
and Human Services 
P.O. Box 1470 
Weaverville, CA 96093 
(530) 623-1 265 
(530) 623-1250 FAX 
Kathy Johnstone 
Health and Human Services Agency 
P.O. Box 5059 
Visalia, CA 93278 
(559) 685-481 5 EXT. 246 
(559) 685-4824 FAX 
Rebecca Espino 
Department of Social Services 
20075 Cedar Road North 
Sonora, CA 95370 
(209) 533-5746 
(209) 533-5714 FAX 
Cecilia Taylor 
Human Services Agency 
505 Poli Street 
Ventura, CA 93001 
(805) 652-7522 
(805) 652-7845 FAX 
Monica Perez 
Department of Social Services 
120 West Main Street 
Woodland, CA 95695 
(530) 661-2806 
(530) 661 -2847 FAX 
Robert Guerin 
Department of Social Services 
P.O. Box 2320 
Marysville, CA 95901 
(530) 749-6452 
(530) 749-6281 FAX 
Sutter 
Tehama 
Trinity 
Tulare 
Tuolumne 
Ventura 
Yuba 
SECTION NO.: 51346 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 291 DATE:09/03/04 19D-65