[page 1]
MEDSeAL ElIGIBlLlfY MANUAL - PROCEDURES SECTION 
Artide 15 - OTHER HEALTH COVERAGE AND MEDICARE B WAN COVERAGE 
1% - IDP~MNG, REPORTING AND CODING om- HEALTH COVERAGE 
1. Background and Overview 
2 Definition -of Other Heatth Coverage 
3. Types af Other Heaith Coverage Tha! Must Be Reported 
4. Types af Caverage/Benefirs and Sins When Other He! Coverage 
Should Nut be Reported 
5. County R- for Identifyhg Other Health Coverage (OHC) 
6. Reporting Other Hem Caverage Information-County and 
Applicant- RespMsibaies 
7. Wmg Other Health Coverage lnfomration on the Medii Eligibility Data 
system 
8 scope 'of Coverage 
9. Current and/or Prior Month Changes to Other Hem Cov- Codes 
10. MecTi Bi Data System On-line Other Hem Cwenpe Code 
Override Process 
12 Beneficiary and County Weffare Depamnem Inquiries Regarding Other 
Heah Coverage 
158 - MEDI-CAL CASUALM CWMS 
15D - MEDICARE GENERAL INFORMATION 
1. Part A Medii 
2 Part B Medicare 
15E - AGED ALIENS lNE!JGlBLE FOR MEDICARE 
1. -- 
2 Supplemental Sewrity income (SSI) AJiens 
MANUAL ETER NO.: 141 DATE: JAR ? 3 ms 
- - . - - - -- -

[page 2]
MEDEAL ELIGIBlLlTY MANUAL - PROCEDURES SECTION 
3. Medicany Needy (MN) Aliens 
4. County Procedures 
15F - MEDICARE AND MEDICARE PREMIUM PAYMENT 
1. Medicare 
3- Agency Responsibilities 
4. Medicare Premkrm Payment Processes and Systems 
6. Buy-ln Wective Date for Medically Needy (MN) Persons 
7. QtdSed Disabied Working Individual (QDWI) Program 
10. Reporting Pro$lems To the ws premium Payment Unit 
12 Resdraion Time 
13. SSI BuyJn Robiems 
14. INQB Screen Forma! and DeiWiorts 
15H - HEALTH INSURANCE PREMIUM PAYMENT PROGRAM 
- 
WUAL LEnER NO.: 141

[page 3]
MEDI-CAL EUGIBIUTY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
15A-IDENTIFYING, REPORTlNG AND CODING OTHER HEALTH COVERAGE fOHC) 
This section provides information and procedures regarding identifying, reporting and coding of Other 
Health Coverage (OHC). Eligibidity workers code OHC on the Medi-Cal Eligibility Data System (MEDS) and 
issue the Health Insurance Questionnaire (DHS 61 55, revision date 2/90 or later) during each application 
and demmimhn interview when applicant or beneficiary responds with a positive answer to the Other 
Health Coverage Question on the Aid to Families with Dependent Children fAFDC) Statement of Facts 
Supporting EIigibiiii for Assistance form (SAWS 2) or Statement of Facts form (MC 21 0). Form DHS 61 55 
is used by county WeIfare Offices to report Other Heatth Coverage to the Deparbnent of Heakb Services 
(DHS) for inclusion on the Health Insurance System (HIS). 
The Department of HeaM Services is responsibie for ensuring that Medi-Cal is the payor of last 
resort for medical care used by Med,i-Cal eligibles in accordance with State Statute Weffare and . . hblutmm Code Section 141 24.90 and Federal Law (Section 1902(a) (25) of the Social Security 
Act). State laws Welfare and Institutions Code, Sections 10020, 14000, 14003, 14005, 
1401 6.3, and 14024) require Mediil beneficiaries to report and utilize these resources before 
using Medii. In instances where Medi-Cal has paid for a beneficiary's medical care first, these 
laws also require the program to seek reimbursement from the responsible third party. 
Since the Mew program is ptM by federal law from paying for services which are covered 
by the beneficiary's health insurance or health plan, in most instances, providers must bill the 
appropriate canier before biIling Medical. This is called cost avoidance. If a beneficiary is 
enrolled in a private Repaid Heatth PlanNeatth Maintenance Organitation (PHPRIMO), the 
beneficiary must be directed to tis or her respective plan for treatment. Mediil is not obligated 
to pay for services available through a .PHP/HMO plan when the beneficiary chooses to seek 
treaaerrt elsewhere. 
In limited instances, a provider may bill the Medi-Cal program diiecth/ wen though a beneficiary 
has OHC. The Department of Health Services then recovers the Medi-Cal payment from health 
insurance carriers using the State's automated billing system. 
Other Health Coverage (OHC) is defined as benefits for health related senrices or entitlements for 
which a Medi-Cal beneficiary is eligible under any private, group, or indemnification insurance 
program, under any other State or federal medical care program, or u,der other contractual or legal 
entidement. 
lrw~rance polides on the Wowing tist provide Other He&b Coverage benefits. A Heatth Insurance 
Questionnaire (DHS 61 55, revision date 2/90 or later) must be completed to identify the health 
coverage source and scope of coverage for these insurance types. 
a. Cameddy - Policies that cover medical expenses related to cancer treatment only. 
SECTION NO.: 5 0 7 6 1 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 1 5 5 DATE: 1-16-96 1SA-1

[page 4]
MEDI-CAL EUGlSlUTY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
CHAMBE -The Civi6an Health and Medical Program of the Uniformed Services pays for 
care delivered by heath provkks to retired members and dependems of active and retired 
members of the Armed Forces under 65. 
hxtaLhb - Policies that cover exsenses related to dental work. 
- Health insurance provided to employees and their 
dependents. This coukl include health insurance through union membership or 
membership in a national organhation, fraternity or trust fund. 
TnrdF - Any health insurance that is 
offered through a trust fund operated by an empioyer.under the authority of the U.S. 
of Labor (e.~., Carpenters, Pipefitters, Plumbers, Laborers, etc.). 
- Policies that provide heatth benefits to persons employed by or affiliated 
with an entity such as an employer, union, association or organization. 
Clnlfth - Policies that cover hospital expenses, surgical expenses, routine medical 
expemes, or major medical. 
khq&d - Policies that cover e>cpenses inanred during hospitalin. 
-ty-Pdidesthapaybenefitsintheformofwshpaymerrts. Thesebenefitsare 
paid to the insured instead of -the provider or services. 
rana - Policies that cover long term care expenses (e.g., amodiil care, 
intermediae care, skilled nursing care). 
Maiar - Pdicies that cover medical expenses over and above those expenses 
covered by a basic benefit plan. 
Ah-* Mems - An absent parent may be required to provide 
medical insurance premium payments or be responsible for a portion of medical bills, or, 
if employed, may be required to indude dependent children in the medical insurance plan 
provided by the employer. 
m. - Policies which pay that portion of medical services which 
Medicare does not pay. 
n. rPHPMdlU - Any heahb benefit 
plan which provides a wide range of comprehensive heatth care se~ces for persons 
insured by the policy or plan. Se~ces are provided by plan designated providers at 
desigrmdfadiibies. 
. . 0. Biscqmm - Poiicies that cover pmsxhd dmgs only. 
P- - Health insuance offered through an educational imaimtkn for enrolled 
students. 
9. S.Wd - Policies that cover surgery-related expenses only. 
SECTION NO.: 5 0 7 6 3 MANUAL LEHEFI NO.: 15 5 DATE: 1-16-96 1-2

[page 5]
-MEDI-CAI. ELIGlBIllTY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
r. Yisim - Policies that cover vision-related expenses only. 
The Department is specifically excluding the following coverage from the Other Health Coverage 
(OHC) coding requirements andlor reporting on a revision date 2/90 or later. 
a. Accident Benefits. 
b. Automobile, Burial, and Life Insurance benefits. 
c. Casualty Workers Compensation benefits. 
d. Diii benefits. 
e. Medicare me XVlll benefits). 
f. Veteran's Administation (VA) benefits. 
B. Coverage under a PHPRIMO which has contracted with the Departmerrt to provide 
Medical services to enrolled beneficiaries. (Mediil Capitated Health Plans) 
h. Coverage which is considered unavailable in the following situations: 
(1 1 Coverage under any plan which is limited to a specific geographic service area and 
the beneficiary rives outside tha area or the plan requires use of specified 
providers(s) and the beneficiary lives more than 60 miles or 60 minutes travel time 
from the specified provider(s1. The beneficiary shouM be advised that many of 
these plans cover out of area care in emergency situations. In this situation, the 
benefidary should provide OHC information to the emergency medical provider so 
that the provider may bill the plan before billing Medi-Cal. 
(2) Coverage to which a child may be entided when: 
(a) The parent or gwrdian refuses to provide the necessary information due 
to "good cause". Good cause shall be determined by the county. Good 
cause exists when cooperation in searring medical support and payments, 
establishing paternity, and obtaining or providing information concerning 
liable or potentially liable third parties from the absent parent can be 
reasonably anticipated to result in serious physical or emotional harm to 
the chiM for whom support is to be sought or to the parent or caretaker 
with whom the child is living, or; 
SECTlON NO.: 5 O 7 6 3 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 15 5 DATE: 1-16-96 1 5A-3

[page 6]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
(b) The absent parent cam be located; a& 
(c) The child is applying for Medi-Cal independemiy and would be in a 
separate Mdil Famii Budget Unit (MFBU) from the custodial parent 
or guardian. 
(dl the child is appiyhg for Mdil independently and has no custodiai 
parent or guardian. Adult chiidren under Section 50014. 
(3) Any coverage to which a chii may be enMled in those instances whe-re the chikl 
is for minor consmt services in accordance with Cal'rfomia Administative 
Code, Ti 22, Section 50147.1. The obiiion to report and utitiie OHC before 
using MdXd co- is not enforced in this situation, since utnion of OHC 
would violate the minor's right to confidentiality regarding histher medical 
se~ces. 
a. Review Statement of Facts 
Review the appticant'~ry's MC 21 0 or CA 2 to determine if there is a positive 
msponse to the question about having private health inntrance or hospitaiion 
insurance. ff there is a positive response, go to procedure 6 (Reporting Ottrer Health 
Coveage If there is no positive response to having private health insurance 
on the MC 210 or CA 2, but the apPr~cantbr&ciary is or was recently employed; has 
health insuance avaiiabk through an employer or family member's employer, but has not 
ended; retired; serves or sewed m the mThary; or there is an absent parent, proceed to 
procedure (b). W .there is no pee response after determining non-availabili of 
insurance, there is no need to complete the DHS 61 55. 
Section 4402, Omniikrs Budget Re~oncT~on Act of 1990 (OBRA '90) mandates that 
when it is cost effective, enrollment in an employer or group heafth plan is a condition of 
Medicaid eliii. Addirtionally, Section 50763(a)(1) California Code of Regulations 
rewires that a Mediil beneficiary shall apply for, and/or main any available hearth 
inaaance when no cost is -hvolved. 
b. Ask Ouestions to Identify OHC: 
The following are key questions to ask applicants~ciaries for identifying the 
availability of OHC: 
SECTION NO-: 50765 MANUAL LRTER NO-: 15 5 DATE: 1-16-96 15A4

[page 7]
MEDW EUGIBJUTY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
SECTION NO.: 5 0 7 6 5 MANUAL LETTrR NO.: 1s 5 DATE: 1-16-96 3 5A-5 
TO EXPLORE WORK RELATED 
QUESTlONS 
Does your empioyer (or a family 
member's employer) provide a 
health insurance plan? 
Did your fonner employer (or a 
family member's employer) 
provide health insurance 
coverage within the last thee 
(3) years? 
Are you coveted by your 
union's health insurance plan? 
Were you covered by your 
union's health insurance plan 
within the last three (3) years? 
Does an absent parent (or the 
absent parent's employer) 
provide heatth insurance 
coverage for you and/or your 
children? 
Did an absent parent (or the 
absent parent's empioyer) 
provide health insurance 
coverage for you and/or your 
children within the last three 
(31 years? 
YES 
tf appiicantheneficiary 
currently HAS heatth insurance 
through an employer (or family 
member's employer), complete 
the DHS 6155 wiih the mnt 
insurance information. tf 
insurance is available, but 
appiicantkneficiary has not 
enrolled, complete the DHS 
61 55 as an Employer Group 
Health Plan EGHP) referral 
(refer to Section 1 5H for 
further information regarding 
EGHP). 
Complete the DHS 61 55 and 
provide the insurance beginning 
and ending dates. 
Complete the DHS 61 55 w-ith 
the heatth insurance 
infortnation. 
Complete the DHS 6155 and 
provide the insurance beginning 
and ending dates. 
Complete the DHS 61 55. 
Complete the DHS 61 55 and 
provide the insurance beginning 
and ending dates. Complete 
the CA2.1 Medical Support 
Referral packet also, 
NO 
Do not complete the 
DHS 61 55. 
Do not complete the 
DHS 61 55. 
Do not complete the 
DHS 61 55. 
Do not complete the 
DHS 61 55. 
Complete the CA2'1 Medical 
Support Referral packet. Do 
not complete the DHS 61 55. 
Complete the CA2.1 Medical 
Support Referral packet. Do 
not complete the DHS 61 55. 
-

[page 8]
MEDECAL EUGIBIUW PROCEDURES MANUAL 
SECTION NO.: 5 07 6 5 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 1 5 s DATE: 1-16-96 1 5A-6 
Do yw belong to any national 
organization (e.g., Foresters, 
Eagles, etc.)? Do you have 
health insurance through the 
organization? 
Were you ever covered by 
insurance through any Mtional 
organization (e.g. Foresters, 
Eagles, etc.) within the last (3) 
years? 
IF ?HE 
APPUCANTlB€NEFICIARY IS 
OVER AGE 65, R€IlED, OR 
DISABLB): 
Do you have Medicare 
covefa-? 
Do you have health insurance 
in addm to Medicare (such as . 
a Medigap or Medicare 
sp9lemem Ww)? 
Didyouhavehealth~kurance' 
in addition to Medicare within 
the iast three (3) yean? 
Do you have health insurance 
through a pension or retirement 
pbn? 
Did you have health insurance 
through a pension or retirement 
plan within the last three (3) 
years? 
Complete the DHS 6155 with 
the health insurance 
infomration. 
Complete the DHS 6155 and 
provide the insurance beginning 
and ending dates. 
YES 
If applicanthem- ONLY 
has Medicare coverage and NO 
wi- 
insuanceplan,donot 
compkte the DHS 61 55. 
C0mpkt.e the DHS 61 55 with 
the heafth insurance 
information. 
Inform person they do not need 
OHC. 
CompletetheDtlS6155and 
provide the insutance beginning 
and ending dates. 
lnform person they do not need 
OHC. 
CMpiete the DHS 6155 with 
the health insurance 
information. 
Complete the DHS 61 55 and 
provide the insurance beginning 
and ending dates. 
Do not complete the 
DHS 6155. 
Do not complete the 
DHS 6155. 
NO 
Do not complete the 
DHS 6155. 
Donotcompletethe 
DHS 61 55. 
Do not complete the 
DHS 6155. 
Do not cornpiete the 
DHS 61 55.

[page 9]
MEDECAL EUGIBIW PROCEDURES MANUAL 
SECTlON NO.: 5 0 7 6 5 MANUAL LETER NO.: 15 5 
NO 
Do not complete the 
DHS 6155. 
Do not complete the 
DHS 61 55. 
Do not complete the 
DHS 61 55. 
Do not complete the 
DHS 61 55. 
(CHAMPUS) is a heatth 
TO EXPLOWE OTHER 
INSURANCE POSSIBIIlTIES: 
Are you (or spouse or absent 
parent) enrdied in any 
educational program? If so, is 
health insurance available 
through a student health plan? 
Were you (or your spouse or 
absent parent) enrolled in any 
educational program that 
offered health insurance within 
the last three (3) years? 
Are you (or your spouse or 
absent parem) in the miiitary? 
DO NOT ASSUME THAT ONLY 
MEN HAM SERVED IN THE 
MILITARY! If so, ask if military 
insurance is available to 
applicanthrdlciary and/or 
hisher dependent(s1. ' 
Were you (or your spwse or 
absent parent) in the military 
within the last three (3) 
years?' 
'NOTE: Civilian Health and Medical 
benefits program for all seven uniformed services: the Army, Navy, Marine Corps, Air Force, Coast 
Guard Public Health Services, and National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. Covered 
persons indude, but are not limited to: 
hubads, wives, and unmarried children of active-duty senrice members; 
retirees, their husbands or wives, and unmarried children; and 
unrernarried husbands and wives and unmarried chiklren of active duty or retired service 
members who have died. 
YES 
Complete the DHS 6155 with 
the heah insurance 
information. 
Compiete the DHS 61 55 and 
provide the insurance beginning 
and ending dates. 
If the applicantbeneficiary 
currendy has insurance 
available through CHAMPUS, 
cMnplete the DHS 61 55 with 
the health insurance 
information. If insurance is 
available, but applicant/ 
beneficiary has not enrolled, 
they should be instnraed to 
contact the Caliimia Defense 
Enrollment Eligibility Reporting 
System (DEERS) Center at 
1-800-33441 62 to find out 
how to go about enrolling for 
CHAMPUS benefits. 
Complete the DHS 61 55 and 
provide the insurance beginning 
and ending dates. 
Program of the Uniformed SeMces

[page 10]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
SECTION NO.: 5 0 7 6 5 MANUAL LEIl'ER NO.: 15 5 DATE: 1-16-96 1 5A-8 
TO EXPLORE OTHER 
WSURANCE POSSIBIUI1ES: 
Howhaveyoupaidforyout 
medical care, prescriptions, and 
eyeglasses before now? 
7 
YES 
If the applicant/beneficiary 
indicates that these services 
have or are covered by 
insurance, compiete the 
DHS 6155 with the heatth 
insurance infomration. Provide 
the ending instmame date if 
applicable. 
NO

[page 11]
MEDI-CAL EUGlBlUTY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
c. Inform AppticantBeneficiary: 
(1 Reponing OHC Does Not Affect Medi-Cal Eligibility: 
Inform appiiimskmkiaries that having and reporting OHC does not in any way 
interfere with their eligibility for or use of Mediil benefits. Under federal law 
Medi-Cal providers cannot deny care because a beneficiary has OHC. 
(2) Do Not Advise Applicants/Beneficiaries To Drop OHC: except if they are on 
Medicare. Federal law requires us to inform them they do not need Medigap 
insurance. 
(3) Responsibilii To And Apply ForlRetain Employer Related Health Coverage 
Benefits: 
Advise appiicants/beneficiaries that federal law requires an individual, as a 
condiion of Mediil eligibility (in order to become or remain Medi-Cal eligible), 
to report employer related health insurance benefits available to hirnther. The 
Medi-Cal program may pay the heatth coverage premiums if it is determined 
cost-effective. Forward any infqrmation obtaii from applicants/beneficiaries 
with avaibbk employer related health benefits to the Department's Heaith 
Insurance Premium Payment program for review of cost-effectiveness (refer to 
Rocedure Manual, Article 15, Section 15H - Health Insurance Premium Payment 
Program). 
(4) Responsibility To Report and Repay Medi-Cal For Insurance Payments Received: 
(a) Forward reimbursement payments to: 
Depmment of Health Services 
Third Party Liability Branch 
P.O. Box 671 
Sacramento, CA 9581 2-0671 
(b) Beneficiaries hid endorse checks from insurance carriers as follows: 
Name of Payee - Party to whom the check is made payable. 
Signed either by the payee or their agent. 
Medi-Cal Identification Number of Beneficiary - This may be a 
different person than the one who received the check. 
"For Deposit Onty to Health Care Deposit Fund' - This will ensure 
that the check will be properly applied to the State fund oniy. 
(c) Beneficiaries must enclose with the check the date(s) of service, the 
provider's name, and a daytime phone number where they can be 
reached . 
SECTlON NO.: 5 0 7 6 5 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 15 5 DATE: 1-16-96 ISAS

[page 12]
MEDGAL EUGIBILIW PROCEDURES MANUAL 
(5) Confidentiari for Minor Consent Services: 
Inform applicams/beneficiaries for minor consem services that Medi-Cal will not 
report coverage nor bill private insurance carriers for such services provided to 
beneficiaries under 21 years of age who are receiving minor consent services. 
When a rest&& Mi Consem service card is issued to a minor, the card should 
not be coded with an OK code and OHC should nat be reported on MEDS nor on 
a Health Insurance Questionnaire (DHS 6155, revision date 2/90 or later). 
County Responsibilities 
a. Issuance of Health Insurance Questionnaire (DHS 6155): 
If the a&icarrt/beneficMry indicates, either on the statement of facts or verbally, that 
heishe has OHC or OHC is miiabie through an employer, issue the Health Insurance 
Questionnaire (DHS 6155, revision date 2/90 or later). The appiicantlbeneficiary 
compietes the DHS 61 55 for the types of coverage oudined in Section 1 5A 3. (Types of 
Other Iiwtth Cwerage That Must be Reported) for all members of the family budget unit 
with OHC. Help the applicantlbeneficiary cornpiete the form by asking if heishe has an 
insurance identification card or other materials that may contain the necessary 
information. 
b. Completion And Accuracy of The DHS 61 55: 
Review the DHS 61 55 for compiete a& accurate information. 
Check the accuracy of information, particularty numbers. Be sure to check the 
Social Security numbers, birth dates, poIicy/grwp numbers and phone numbers. 
tf possible, attach a copy of the pdi or copy of the insurance card. 
Be sure the appiicant'dbeneficiary's name is listed, if covered, and is spelled 
correctly. 
Be sure the applicant'sheneficiary's complete address is provided. 
Be sure ~ -hwanc.e pd'i holder's name is provided and spelled correctly. This 
name may be dierent from the applicant's/beneficiary's name. 
Be sure the insurance policy holder's Social Security number is provided. 
and acasate efigirty worker information. This includes worker 
number and telephone number, including area code. 
Be sure the form is signed by the appiicantkneficiary and dated. 
-- - -- -- 
SECTIW NO.: S O 7 6 5 MANUAL LFlTER NO.: 155 DATE 1-16-96 15A-lo

[page 13]
MEDI-CAL EUGlBlLlTY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
c. Information On Scope of coverage: 
When reviewing a completed DHS 61 55, check the scope of coverage field, item 10, to 
inswe this infomytion is reported. tf the applicantbeneficiary does not know the scope 
of coverage, request that heishe either rwiew the policy or contact the insurance carrier 
to obtain this information. Scope of coverage information is essential in completing the 
DHS 6155 and must be provided. See Section 15A (8. Scope of Coverage) for more 
information about scope of coverage. 
d. Applicants/Beneficiaries Wrth More Than One Insurance Policy: 
If the appiicant/beneficiary has more than one inswance policy, provide himher with a 
DHS 6155 to be cornpieted for each carrier. This includes policies covering single 
se~ces, such as dental only coverage and vision se~ces. 
e. Code MEDS with the Appropriate OHC Code: 
Please refer to Section 15A (7. Coding Other Health Coverage Information on The 
Mediil Oigibiiii Data System) for procedures. 
f. Batching and Mailing DHS 61 55: 
WeeW, batch and mail the white copy of the DHS 6155 and any copies of health 
insurance identification cards or health insurance policies to: 
~OfHsalthSwvices 
mhsurancbSscbion 
P.O. Box 1287 
-, CA 95812-1287 
9- Retain the Yellaw Copy of the DHS 6155: 
Retain a copy of the DHS 6155 form in appliis/beneficiary's case He. 
Send the pink copy of the DHS 6155 to the DA's office in absent parent cases. Give it to the 
beneficiary when it is not an absent parent shetion (refer to Procedure Manual, Artide 23, 
Medical Support Program). 
i Notify the Departmerrt of OHC Changes, Lapses in Coverage, or Changes in Scope of 
ccwa~e-. 
When there has been a change to the scope of coverage, pofii number, insurance biling 
infomration, or if the beneficiary's OHC has hpsed, will lapse or change, update MEDS with 
the conected OHC code as needed. Courtly ETii Workers (EWs) must send in corrected 
OHC Mmalbn on a completed DHS 6155 or by ding the Department of Health Se~ces 
HeakhlnsuranceSectionat1-8CKMS2-5294wtlen: 
SECTlON NO.: 5 0 7 6 5 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 15 5 DATE: 1-16-96 15A-11

[page 14]
MEDI-CAL ELlGIBlUrY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
(I) OHC has changed or is -; 
(2) If reporting was not timely, but the county learns OHC bas terminated or changed 
m12rnonthsprior!Orede!t~ . . ask beneficiary to complete a DHS 61 55. 
Include the polis termbtiltian date. 
irfom,beneCiclanes . . that such -Mmmtion rmst be reported to the county within ten (1 0) days 
idlowing the event 
i. Verification af~ermii.iated Other Hsatth Coverage 
When a beneficiary indicates that */her OHC has terminated counties must obtain 
vemCalhdWtermerabon . . pior to removing the OHC code from Medii Eligibai Data 
System. VeriCicabionofOHCterminationwinbeeither. 
(1) A paw or pension ched< stub which shcms deductions fw private health insurance 
have ceased. 
(2) An Exphmh~ of Benefits from the insurance carrier showing the date the pdicy 
(3) A temtinabbn letter from the hwmce carrier and/or the employer showing the date 
the pd'i terminated tf the letter indii that continuadion of rnedii benefas is 
avalable under &rmWatd omibus Budget Recondiation Act (COBRA) Iaw, and 
the beneficiary has a high cost medical condition, complete a Health Insurance 
Questionnaire @HS 6155) in time to ensure that the poiicy can be continued and 
send it tothe Dqmmnfs Health Insurance Premium Payment Unit, P.O. Box 1287, 
Sauamento, CA 95812-1287. Yw may fax the DHS 6155 to (91 6) 322-8778 or CAI 
1 -6294 for m~re 
(4) Aff&vit signed by the applim stating he/she no longer has, or never 
had, OHC. This aRciavP shorrid also indude the date the policy terminated, if lcnomr 
This affidavit shwld be used when an emneous OHC code appears on a mipienfs 
Medi card afWr the Department conducts a data match with an insumnce 
- 
k. High Cost Medical CMdin 
Medi-Cal eligibles who have a high cost medical condition should be referred to the 
Department's Heatth k.rsaance Premium Payment (HIPP) Program as specified above. For 
more information about the HiPP Program, please refer to Section 15H of the Medi-Cal 
Eligibiiii Procedures Manual. 
1. Employer Group Health Plan 
MediiCal eligibles who have health insurance aMilabie through an employer (or a family 
member's employer) should be referred to the Department's Empioyer Group Heah man 
EGHP) Program. For more information about the EGHP Progam, please refer to 
Section 15H of Medi-Cal Eligibility Procedures Manual. 
SECTION NO,: 5 0 7 6 5 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 155 DATE: 1-16-96 15A-12

[page 15]
MEDIICAL EUGIBIUTY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
m Notify the Deparbnent of OHC Termination 
Colarty eligibility workers must maintain a copy af the verification of OHC termination in the 
case file as well as send a completed DHS 6155, shaving the pdicy stop date, to the 
Departmer$ For- SewayIncome/State Supplemental Payment cases, county 
eligibility workers should delete the OHC code, attach a copy of the verification of OHC . . temwrrabon dthe completed copy ofthe DHS 6155 showing termination date and send both. 
documentstotheDepartment 
(1) Report Current OHC informtion to Counties: 
Appli-- . . who have contracbal or legal entitlement(s) to any health we 
coverage must disdose this inbmathn to the RN and must also provide specific health 
mfwmfkn to the health care provider so that the provider may bill the Jiie third party. 
(2) Report Avaaable OHC to Counties: 
ApFJ1-v . * 
are required to report the aMJabilii of employer related health 
benefits 
(3) Report OHC Changes to Courrtiex 
Ap@cank- who mmbte, or obtain OHC must report such information 
tothe countywahin ten (10) daysfdlwbgtheerent 
(4) Report OHC information to Providers 
Applicants- . . are required to provide cum OHC billing information to the 
provider at the time rnedi/dental services are received. This information shall indude 
gollp nsnber and Wing aRice address WMd failure to provide such information may aliow 
a provider to bill the beneficiary as a private pay patient 
7. Coding Other Health Coverage Infomation on the Medi-Cal Eligibility Data System 
Eligibility Workers (EWs) must code Other Health Coverage (OHC) on the Medii Eiigibility Data 
Sys&m (MEDS) at the time eligiblily is dePemrined or rederermined or at any time a beneficiary reports 
a change in coverage. 
a Coding for No OHC: 
When an applii/bedkhy states that he/* does not have WC, enter the letter code 
W (No Other Heatth coverage) on MEDS in the OHC field. 
SECTION NO.: 5 0 7 6 9 MANUAL LElTER NO.: 15 5 DATE: 1-16-96 35A-13

[page 16]
MEDECAL EUGIBIUTY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
b. Coding WC: 
The fdlowkrg is a Iii of OHC codes and instNcbions on haw to determine the appropriate 
OHC code to place on MEDS. in order to determine the approp&e de, the foliowing 
questionS sholrld be asked at the application and red&- intecview once the 
has reported OHC: 
Does your heatth insorance provide or pay for hospital inpatient care? 
lftheappkant~~~toatleastthreeofthefwrq~nslisted 
abwe,~meapproprtade~avoidancecodeonMEDS. Costavoidancecod= 
to use are: 
Blue Cross 
CHAMPuSPrime* 
Aebra 
Medii HMO Risk 
GenemiAmerican 
MrrtuddOnraha 
- Life 
JotmHancodc 
user 
DentdlWPdides 
PHP/HMO, nat oqhemise specmed 
EcpS#lr 
EUue Shield 
Traveiers 
~omecbicrrt ~erreral (aGw) 
Variable,anycarriernatuniquelyidentiCied 
Great West Life Insurance 
Providerrt Lifeand Acdderrt 
PrindpalFarancialGroup 
Pacific Mutual Life Insurance 
AltaHeam~~Inc. . . Asoaatm of Retired Persons (AARP) 
Nw Yorlc LiFe insurance 
Plsase note ektk Aogust 10,1994 CHAMWS Star&rd or CHAMPUS Ejara other he* coverage shwld 
becodedwiththeOHCcostV. 
SECTION NO.: 5 0 7 6 9 MANUAL l.EllER NO.: 15 5 DATE: 1-16-96 IS14

[page 17]
MEDW EUGIBIUTY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
(2) Prepaid Healtt~ Plan/Heatth Maintenance Orgamatm . . /Competitive Medical Plan 
(PHP/HMO/CMP) Other Health Coverage Codes: 
If you determine from the qws2hs abcwe that an appliint/beWkky record 
requires a cost avoidance code, ask the 
appiikantm arrswers 'yes', enter a PHP/HMO/CMP code on MEDS. If the 
applkantm has Kaiser or CHAMPUS Prime, assign a 'K' or 'C code. If the 
applmnt/be&k&y has Medii HMO/CMP coverage, assign an F code. Code 
any other PHP/HMo with a P, even though a lrnique cost avoidance code may exist 
for the caws fee-br-snhce coverage For example, should an 
m/bm&&y have M1 wvwage through Travelers Insurance, but coverage 
is IitniW to senrices pm&d by a spedfic group af prufessjds and hospitals, use 
the PHP/HMO code F instead of the cost avoidance code T. 
Medii benefiaanes . . covered by Kaiset, WPUS Prime, or ather 
PHP/HMO/CMPs must use desigmd fadii Mi will reject bills for services 
pwidedwbenefiaanes . . with cards coded 'K. %, Y, or T. MedW will pay for 
senrices only when the sewice is not a covered benelit under the designated plan 
The service pmkkr, hwmm, must aach payment denial -hfamalion from the plan 
irdicatbrg the service is not a cowed pian benefa. This will generate an override in 
theciaimspaymerttsystemandaUowpaymenttothe~. 
~theDepammtc#MatoWainreimb~fKwnKaiser,CHAMPUSPrime, 
or crther PHP/HMO/CMPs, the impommx 05 the IC, 'C, 'P, w T coding on the 
Medicardcannatbeoveremphasized. 
(3) Post Payment Recovery OHC Codes 
If the applicant/be&&ry responds 'yesm to fewer than three of the four -ens 
listed abcwe, or if the applW/beneficiary does not know the scope of coverage, 
enterthefdlawingpost~recoverycodes: 
A Other Caverage code for any insurance company; 
M Mdtiple coverage; beneficiary has more than one ins- 
company(useoniywhenconrpaniesareiderdified =post paw 
tecwery -1. 
X BLUE SHIELD 
Z BLUE CROSS 
(4) Muttiple Cwt Avoidance or PHP/HMO/CMP Other Hem Caverage: 
tf an appkmt/beneficiary has multiple (Mro or more) full axerage policies, one of 
whkh isa PHP/HMO/CMP, use the appropriate PHP/HMO/CMP code (Y C, P, or 
F). Otherwise, assign the appropriate cost avoidance code for the canier that 
provides the most comprehensive coverage. 
SECTION NO.: 5 07 69 MANUAL ETEFi NO.: 1 5 5 DATE: 1-16-96 IS-15

[page 18]
MEDI-CAL EUGIBIUTY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
If the appIikant/bewkhy responds W to all four questions I'i above, ask if 
he/* has an insuance pdicy for dental ody coverage. If the appiicant/benekiary 
msp~nds 'yes' to hhg dental only coverage and he/& does not have any other 
heafth insurance pdi, enter the cost avaidance code 'Lm (Dental Only Policies) on 
MEDS. 
8. Scope of Coverage 
Upon receipt of a Health Insurance Q uestiorvlaire @HS .6l55, revision date 2/90 or her), the 
Department enters insurance Wli Momration and scope of coverage codes onto the Health 
Insurance System (HIS). This infomration is printed on h4edii cards. The scope of coverage 
arSormation assists providers in ckbmmg . . which services must be billed to the beneficiary's 
b.rsumnce. The scope of coverage codes are as fdlm: 
Hospaallnpatientcare 
Hospital Outpatient Care 
AAedical~sVrsits 
PrescriptionDNgs 
LongTmCare 
vi Care 
Dental Care 
When an EW Mially asigs a post payment re~cnrery code m the MEDS, the Department will change 
itto a cast avoidance code upon receiving the DHS 6155 and enter the scope of coverage codes on 
HIS. Replacement of the post payment recovery code with a wst avoidance code when scope of 
caverage has been entered is a cwred procedure. Counties are not to change the cost avoidance 
code back to the original post payment recovery code. 
If Medi-Cal benefictanes . . have health insurance, but the MediLCal program has not yet received 
rnfomzation about the bsumnce coverage, the word COMPREHENSM: wiJl appear on Med'i 
cards irstead d scope of coverage codes This designation 'COMPRMENSIV€ alerts providers to 
wtheotherheaminsumnceforaaservicesprovided. 
When a change tothe scope OF caueage, pdicy number, or in#rmnce Wing infonnatian is necessary, 
request conections by either submWng a med D?iS 6155 or cding the Department's Hem 
Insurance Sectionat 1-6294. 
9. Current and/or Prior Month Changes to Other Health Coveraqe Codes 
a Current and/or Prior Month Changes for New Eli: 
~~areinWy~forMediCatand are repottedwith a costavoided insurance 
poky, cauntks may enter a cost avoidarm code for curtent and/or prior months. 
SECTION NO.: 5 0 7 6 9 MANUAL LEllER NO.: 15 5 DATE: 1-16-96 15A-16 
8

[page 19]
MEDI-CAL EUGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
b. Current and/or Rior Month Changes fur Ongoing Cases: 
No cost- Other Heatth Coverage (OHC) codes may be assigned to current and/or 
prior montirs for ongoing cases The message M373 'ONLY PAY AND CHASE (POST 
PAYMUJT RECOVERY) OTHER-COV ALLOWED WHEN ELIGIBLE ON MEDS will appear 
when EWs attempt to enter a cost avoidance OHC code to current and/or prior months for 
a beneficiary who is already MEDS eiiibie, 
tf an ongoing elii has been id- with unreported OHC which is cunenUy amiable or 
was aMaable at any time during MEDS history months, assign the post payment recovery 
cade 'A' for the clinent and prior months and use the appropriate OHC code for the peMmg 
munth Send a completed Health lnsumnce Quesbjonnaire @tiS 6155, revision date 2/90 or 
ater) to the Department tt is very important for EWs to make sure the insurance policy start 
date is induded on the DHS 6155 because the retroactive post payment recovery process 
errablestheDepammtt0 bill theinsurancecarrierforsenricesalreadyreceived. 
The fdlouring illatmSes the propriety of various OHC code changes for current and/or prior 
months: 
PERMISSIBLE CHANGES 
Post Payment Recovery Code 
NoorherHealth 
C<rverage Code N 
Post Payment Reanmy Code 
PROHIBITED CHANGES 
No other Health Coverage (N) TO Cost Avoidance Code 
PostPaymeraFkcoveryCode TO Cost Avoidance Code 
Cost Avoidancecode TO A DW Cost Avoklance Code 
10. Mdi Eii~iba'i Data System On-Line Other Heatth Coverage Code Override Process 
To change the Other Health Cmemge (OHC) code to cost avoidance for the'~ure month on 
report the proper cost avoidance code by using an EW20 or EW30. 
tf a cwrected NledCCal card is required for a current and/or prior months, use an EW15 to 
change the OHC cade to a post paymerrt recavery code ,K and issue the corrected Medii 
cam). 
When making on-line changes to OHC codes, always send in a Health Insurance 
Questionnaire @HS 6155, revision date 2/90 or later) containing the dd insurance policy 
information to the Department (indude termination date of the pol'iT Submit another 
DHS 6155 coraahdng the - new insurance pdicy information (indude the start date and scope 
of coverage of the policy). 
- 
SECTImNO.: 50769 MANUAL LEtlER NO.: 1 5 5 DAm. 1-16-96 1 SA-I7

[page 20]
MEDI-CAL EUGIBIUTY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
b. Suppiemental Scurity Income/State Supplemental Payment Cases: 
TocirangetheOHCcodetocostavddancefw~fu$nemorahmSupplemental Security 
Incorne/State Suppiemeneal Faymen? (SSI/SSP) report the proper cost avoidance 
code for the future month by submitting a completed WS 6155 to the Department The 
Department will assign the proper #rst avoidance . . code and scope of coverage. Submit 
anather DHS 6155 contarnnrg the* insurance infomation Cmdude termination date of the 
-1- 
If a conected Medi card is teqrdted for a current and/or prior months, use EW55 to 
change the OHC code to a post payment recovery code 'N and issue the corrected 
Wi card(@. 
~henmahgorrlinechangesto~m=~'ahyssend intwo~ti~6l55s, onecontaining 
theoJinsurancepdiiksormation(indudi.thepolicy'st~ . . date) and the other 
containingthenewinsurancepdicy~ - 
Be aware that dmging the OHC code will dele& scope of covemge and health insurance 
dmnafim on the Medii card. This safety measure is intended to prevent the possii8'i 
dthe insurance information Wing to match the new OHC value 
EWs must issue replacement Medi cards for bath countycontrdled and SSI/SSP eIiiible cases 
when the OHC code is m m. tf a Wciary needs an IMMEDIATE NEED CARD onty because the 
OHC code is incorrect, Wow the oniine instructions described in Section 15A (10. MEDS OrrLine 
Other HedtJ'~ Ccr~emge Code Ovwide Recess). If the beneficiary needs an IMMEDIATE NEED CARD 
becausethesoopeofcauemgecodiis~proceedasfdl~~~: 
If the beneficiaty can wait a few days for a card, cd the Heatth Insurance Secbn at 
14004526294 and request a change to the scope of coverage coding on the Heaitt~ 
Insurance System (HIS). Allowing one day for the HIS update, request a Medii card the 
ned day using the Ew45. 
If the be. needs a cad the same day, use the EM5 or EW 55 transaction to change 
the OHC code to an 'A' and to issue a MdCd card TM action waf suspend HIS so 
scope t3 coverage or hedth *haram is displayed on the IMMEDIATE NEED CARD. In order 
toreportthepropercostavoidancecodeforthefuhaemonthoncwnty~cases, 
in-* an OHC code change using the EW20 .or EW30 and send a comple?ed Health 
Insurance Q uestionnaire @tls 6155, nevision date 2/90 or=-) containing the amcted 
scope of coverage to the Department For SSI/SSP cases, send a completed DHS 6155 to 
theDqmtrm& TheDepartmentw3assipthepropetcostavoidancecodeand qxjateHIS 
wahtheconec&dscopeofcovera~e. 
SECTK)EINOI: 50769 MANUALElERNO-: 155 DATE: 1-16-96 15A-18

[page 21]
MEDI-CAL EUGlBlUTY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
12 Beneficiary and County WeSfare Department Inquiries Regarding Other Health Coverage 
Other Health Coverage questions can be answer& between RW am. and 5:W p.m, Monday through 
Friday, by W'slg the Hdh Insurance Section's tdl-free number, 1800-952-5294- Spanish speaking 
opatm are also aMihble from 8:00 am to 5:W p.m., Monday through Friday. Eligibifity Workers 
maygiVedlistdEireenumbert0~ . * 
with the raderstan&ng that only health -nswance related 
qmstknscanbeanswered. 
- - 
SECTION NO.: 5 0 7 6 9 MANUAL WR NO.: 15 5 DATE:l-16-96 4SA-19

[page 23]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
15B - MEDI-CAL CASUALTY CLAIMS 
County welfare departments are required to notify the Department of Health Services (DHS) 
when they obtain information that a beneficiary sustained injury forwhich Medi-Cal may have 
paid benefits and where the beneficiary or hislher representative has initiated an inskance 
claim; workers' compensation claim; or wrongful death, malpractice, or similar civil suit against 
a potentially liable third party. 
One important source of information is the Statement of Facts for Medi-Cal (MC 210). 
Question 9C asks whether an applicant is seeking compensation through an insurance 
settlement or lawsuit when a physical or emotional problem was caused by an injury. 
Question 34 also asks whether the applicant or any family member has a pending suit or 
insurance settlement for accident or injury. 
The county must notify DHS of a potential third-party liability claim when: 
1. Information on the MC 210 or from other sources indicates potential third-party liabil~ty; 
2. Eligibility is granted or has been in existence for any length of time; and 
3. The beneficiary intends to use Medi-Cal to pay for injury-related services. 
All notifications should contain the following information: 
1. Medi-Cal beneficialy's name. If a minor, the parents'/ guardians' names should also be 
given. 
2. Current address and telephone number. 
3. Fourteen-digit Medi-Cal identification number(s) (for example. 19-20-2001246-001). All 
numbers must be reported; a beneficiary may have had more than one number if the aid 
calegory or the ~amil~ Budget Unit and-person number changed. 
4. Social Security Number. 
5. Date of Birth. 
6. Date of injury. 
7. Name, address. and telephone number of third-party recovely source(s) (i.e., attorney, 
insurance company, elc.). 
8. Name, address, and telephone number of treating providers of health care and dates of 
service (if available). 
9. For workers' compensation claims. a copy or the number of the Application for 
Adjudication of Claim (if available). 
SECTION NO.: 50771 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 298 DATE: 10/04/05 158-1

[page 24]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
Notifications may be reporled by calling (800) 952-5776 or (916) 322-0521. or by writing 
to: 
Department of Health Services 
CasualtyMTorkers Compensation Section 
P.O. Box 2471 
Sacramento, CA 9581 Id471 
In no event should any county agency place liens upon beneficiaries' judgments. 
settlements. or other assets or in any way attempt to recover from a beneficiary or hislher 
attorney any amount reimbursable to Medi-Cal in casualty cases. 
When the CasualtyMlorkers Compensation Section receives payment on an account. a 
written notification is sent to the welfare department of the county in which the beneficiary 
resides. This is to alert the county that a settlement was reached which may affect the 
eligibility of the individual. 
SECTION NO.: 50771 MANUAL LEITER NO.: 298 DATE: 10/04/05 158-2

[page 25]
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES 
BT*mORKEICT-IKY)LEMY 
r.0. .ox *?I 
SACUULMTQ U ))I11 
1tu~lrunderStgdingthttkcrstipientlr)onthc~codoredlutmry~rsctindaorh~t 
from a petsonat in- case which ha been rrccmly molnd. The aact amount of ash rstivcd. if 
any.byachrccipiartbunlrnorm 
This infwnutian 
. .. may amkt you in dcPmrunmg the rcdpimt's eliiility for wbli asirttncc or 
Mcd'il. 
If the fifth (5th) digit of the ase numkr ha nine 191. it rrprenntr an SS1/55P fesipiient 
--------------------------------------------------- 
Section 507fl l4miAL LETTER NO. 91 (8-25~86) 15B-3 
_--_-----------------------------------------------

[page 27]
- MEDI-CAL EUGiBiLllY MANUAL - PROCEDURES SECnON 
- - 
1SP-MEDICARE GENERAL INFORMATION 
PART A MEDICARE 
1. MONTHLY PREMIUMS MEDI-CAL PAYMENT ON BEHALF 
OF THE EUGIBLE BENEFICIARY 
Nonlonmyptemirnnlader $221 -00 effective 1 /93 
Medieare Part A for mast 
-biQ: 
- Those who buy Medii Part A 
pay'a monPhiy Pan A premkms and 
-the pmfm may be higher forthuse 
whoerndltate. 
2 HOSWrAL CARE 
DeducWe required rrpon fbst $676.00 effective 1/93 
admissh to a hospital and 
su&eqwaadmbionfne>d . . adrmsstonisafter60daysfrorn 
disctrarge. 
FLrstWdays None; fully covered by 
Medim for rehabaim 
of mwsodbl care 
6lsttOmday 
Laethneresave-60days 
3. SKILLED NURSING FACIUM 
Fast 20 days 
sl69.00 per day Me&& 1/93 
$338.00 per day &ectiYe 1 /93 
N-; buy covered by ~~~ 
for rehabai or no- 
cafe 
$84.50 per day effective 1/93 
SECTION: SO775 MANUAL LEHEFl NO.: 127 DATE: FEB 0 1 1994 IsD-1

[page 28]
MEDIeAL EUGIBILSW MANUAL - PROCEDURES SECflON 
PART B MEDICARE (Supplementary Medical lnsumnce) 
I. MONTHLY PREMIUM .e $36.60 effective 1 /93 
2 DEDUCRBLE FOR COVERED 
SERVICES 
$1 00.00 per year for 1993 
3. MEDICAL tNSURANCE BENEFITS 80 percent of approved charges 
forcoveredservicesaftet 
deductible is met 
Heat&h Care Fm Adminisbation cmmcrs with Health Maintenance Organization/Competitive 
Medical Plans (HMO/CMP) to allow certain indiiuafs who are entitted to benefas under Medilcare Part 
B or Patts A and B to el& to receive those benefh through an HMO/WP. Medii beneficiaries 
cuuefed by the WI HMO/W must use designated facWes. Treatment from nor* providers 
mustbethmghampmea&withthepbt Suchber&kms 
*. 
can be identified by an T in the OHC 
Wd on MEDS record ad on the Me-Cal card. 
SECTION: 50775 MANUAL L€l7ER NOI:

[page 29]
MEDKAL EUGIBlLtTY MANUAL - PROCEDURES SECTlON 
15D MEDICARE GENERAL lNFORMAnON 
PAFIT A MEDICARE 
1. MONTHLY PREMIUMS MEDK'AL PAYMENT ON BEW 
OF ME ELIGIBLE 8-UARY 
NomonthlypPemitgn~ SZ21.m eRedive 1/93 
Medicare Part A for most . - beneffcraneskrt: 
-Thsewho buy Medicare Part A 
payamonWyPartApterrrirrnSand 
-theptemium~ybe~forthose 
whomlate .. 
Deduc!ible required on fbst -. admssrontoahospitalatxj 
subsqwaadmbsicmifnerd 
adrrdssionkafter60daysfrom 
-@me- 
Srstto90thday i 
Lifetime fsem - 60 days 
Fast2ortays 
Zlst to 100th day 
PART B MEDICARE (Supplementary Medical insurance) 
1. MONTHLY PREMIUM 
$676.00 effective 1/43 
None: fdty #nrered by 
Medicarefor-i 
orecare 
2 DEDUCTlBLE FOR COVERED $1#MK)per~fOr1= 
SDIVlCES 
3. MEDICAL INSURANCE BENEFITS =)perCentafapptwed 
chargesfor#rveredsenricesaher 
deductible is met 
SECTION: SOnS MANUAL NO.: 119 DATE: 8/11/93 Pm 4-1

[page 31]
- 
MEDJ-CAL EUGIBtUTY MANUAL - PROCEDURES SECTlON 
15E AGED UENS INEUGlBLE FOR MEDICARE 
BACKGROUND 
Smbn 1836 (2) of the Social Se#aity Ad provides that any alii age 65 or older, who is not entitled to 
morrWy Social Searrity Reahement/Dii (l%e 11) benefits or Raarwd Retirement Benefits must be a 
Iawhdty admitted resident of the United States with five (5) years continuous residence to be efigible for 
pmhase of Medicate Part B coverage. 
When of Medicare digibilii is received through Buy411 or the Beneficiary and Earnings Data 
Exdrange (ENDEX). the Medii Oii Data System (MEDS) record is autornabliy coded to indicate 
Medicare eligIMily (cocks 1.2 3.4. or 5 in the first and/or second digit of the Medicare status). In both 
sbmtbq the beneficiary's Media card is coded to indicate Medii coverage, and prwrders are 
reeuiredtoMIW-priormMlingMedi-Calforservicesproviddtothesebeneficiaries 
-A1 SECURllY. INCOME (SSI1 AUENS 
Alien krformatbn from the State Data Exd'mge (SDX) fae identifies aged aliens eligible for Supplemental 
Security lncwne (SSJ). These eiigibles are coded with a 99 ahm indicator on the Medicare status line of 
MEDS to suppress prhting of the Medicare Wior code on the Medii catd This process uses the 
Alien Code and the ImmQmbn and -on Service QNS) Entry Date from the SDX fae. !f there is 
no INS Erdry Date, a date is eSabMed using the Medi-Cal date of elQWity from !he SDX record. 
SSI/SSP eligbles & Wude sane aged akm who are no! entiUed to Medimre. If such persons come 
tocwrrtyoRices~theirMed'~card~shawsMedicarecoverage,cotadiesaretotepwt the s&mtbn using the State Buy-tn Problem Report (Medhre Part A and 0) DHS 6166 (4/90). This form 
k to be fded to the Prendum Payment. Unit. . 
BsredupoocotmiyipuCtheRen*lmPaymeRUnitwllupdateMEDSsoMedi-CalLardrfor~pe~ns 
are~codeds)rawbigMediwreenMemenL TheINSEntryDateisusedtodet~whentheS~ 
rasidency Is met so action can be taken to attempt Me&cate Buy-ln Semiannually, an hJii Register (@ 
datlaliensmeetingthe5yearresidencyreqrriremerd)isprovidedtoSSAdistridofficessobeneficiarieS 
canbeinsmrctedtoapplyforMedkarePart Bbenefas 
MEDICALLY NEEDY IMN) AUMS 
Under the pteviws system. unmties reported the Date of Residence (ADOR) into the Wed States 
for these aged aliens to the Mum Paymenl Unif on form DtfS 6166 (formerty HAS 8). The Premium 
Payment Unit mrW#l -to iderdaythe beneficiaryasanagedalien (RAedicare St-99) and posted 
!he ADOR. This in turn suppressed the Medicate bd@alor on tM Media card until the five year residency 
requirement was met The ADOR was used to initiate Buy* actioh 
in order for the Premium Payment Unit to determine which -ry is eligible for Medicare ben&S. 
cwnties must row provide Jim WomWon when srrbmdeing approved case infMmarion to MEDS for d 
colaay detemrined cases 
SECTION: SOrn MANUAL LETTER NO.: 119 DATE: 8/11/93 PAGE: 15-1

[page 32]
MEDIeAL ELlGfBlUTY MANUAL - PROCEDURES SECTION 
COUNTY PROCEDURES 
MEDS has three data elements (Refugee/4ed Alien indicator, INS Entry Date and 5igibaity me) which 
are reposted by comties when submiLting case infonnatjon for all county determined cases These data 
dements are used by the State to debmine Medicare card coding and whether to anempt Medicare Buy-ln. 
1. REFUGEWAGED ALIEN INDICATOR 1 = indochinese Refugee 
(MEDS Name = Aged Aim Indicator) 7 = Other Refugee 
(DE -1 . 8 = ctbaftmw 
9 =AgedAlien 
= Delete Rehrgee/Nren Infomption 
a) Codes1.7.and8areusedt~aentayre4ugees@revioustytepo~edontheMC255) 
c)  he astertik p) is used to delePe codes brconectty entered on MEDS. 
INS ENTRY DATE 
(MEDS Name = INSEnay-MMYY) 
@E -1 
EUGIBrUN APPROVAL DATE 
~p-~ -- 
SECnON: 50727 MANUAL LETTER NO,: 1 19 DATE: 8/11/93 PAGE. 1s-2

[page 33]
MEDEAL EUGIBIUTY MANUAL - PROCEDURES SECTION 
1. EXF'lANATION OF MEDICARE 
Mediire. administered by the federal Social Security Ad- (SSA), is a Mdth insurance 
program that pays for certain medical senrices provided to individuals entideb to coverage. !t 
carers the aged (65 and ww), blii or died @ersons di fw Social Security Msabai 
paymerds)'and persorrs in need of renal didpis or nansplarrt There are two parts to the Medicare 
program: 
a Part A Hospital Insurance is aMaaMe to persons at no cost and helps pay for 
irpatiern hospilal care. some inpatient care in a skiled nursing facility, home heath care 
and hospice care. Those who do not for 'iree' Part A can pmhiwie such coverage 
through Pay- of a m premium 
b Part B Supplemental Medical insurance may be pmhased from SSA through paw of 
a monthly premium and helps pay for dodor's services, otdpatient b@al swvices, 
dumble medical eqtdpment, and a number of other medical services and supplies that an? 
not wveredbythehas@alinsurancepartofMediicare. 
2 MEDlCARE HEALTH INSURANCE CARD 
Medicate Health insurance cards are prepared ard n@ed by SSA and the Railroad Retiwrnent 
Baard~minstanceswheteRailroadRetiremerdbenefidariesareinvdved)to~ . - whohave 
~entkmatoMediiebenefits. 
The red. white and blue card shcrm the Heatth InsUranCe aabn (HIc)nUmber. to Part 
A and/or Part B and the efiecrive date of each. The Mecrkare beneficiary mceiws a new card 
each time his- Mediire eli@Wy status changes 
3. HEALTH INSURANCE CWM (HIC) NUMBER 
TheHICnumberisanhnportarOpieceofinf~usedbytheStateand#wntiestoid~an 
individual's Medii record. A HIC number must be alpha/numeric and cons& af ten to twehre 
posiWns The HIC number must be in Social Security Number (SSN) or Ftailroad Relimnat Board 
(RW - - 
(1) The first nine positions must be numeric 
(2) Po&h 10 must be alphabetic; position 1 1 must be a@hbetk numeric, or bfank; 
and position 12 must be blank (e.g.1234567898.1234S7SZ 1234561898P ). 
SECTION: 50773 MANUAL LETTER NO-: 119 DATE: 811 1/93 PAGE SF-1

[page 34]
MEDI-CAL EUGIBILITY MANUAL - PROCEDURES SECTION 
b. RRB Format: If the first nine positions are not numeric. the HIC number is assumed to be 
in RRB format The number constits of a one to three alphabetic character prefix in the firs 
three positions, fdlowed by a sbc or nine digit number. The fdtowing criteria must be met: 
(1) The p&k must be A, H. CA, JA. MA. MH. PA PD. pH. W4 WD. WH. Wa WCD. 
or WCH. left justified (beginning in first posaion of field) wah traPkrg blanks cd 
appIie). If the tast nine positions are numeric, they must contain a vald SSN 
(eg.. A 123456789. WC 123456789. WCA123456f89). 
(2) if prefk is a singe alpha character, it must be fdiowed by two bWcs (e.9. 
A 123456789). ff ptefk has two atpha characters, it must be fdlowed by a single 
blank (e-g. WA 123456789). 
MEDICARE PREMIUM PAYMENT 
1. PART B PREMIUM PAYMENT (BUY-IN1 PROGRAM 
Buy-In refers to the arrangement through which the State uses MediCaI funds to pay the rnMdhty 
Medicare Part 8 insurance premiums for qualiing Medical recipierns who are also Jig& for 
Medicare. 
The Buy-ln agreement was initiated tmenabie the State to obtain marimurn Federal Fnrancial .. . Fbmqmcm (FFP) for Wi tecipi. 
Under the Part B Bvy-ln agreement, the SWe may begin to pay Part B premhrms for quaimed Mdk 
Wredpierrtsatanytimeandisnotlimaedto SSA'sdefinedopenenrdl~periods TheState 
may also BuyJn renoactkely to the entitlemeht date of an individual at any time wahOut paying a 
~~penatty. AaMediirecipients~ieforMedicarePart8~~earereqrrired 
to partidp;&e in the Medicare BuyJn program in accordance with Sedion SOTn of Tidie 22 of the 
QTiCodedR~ 
PART A PRmAlUM PAYMENT 
Medii pays Part A premiums dyfor OMBs whodonotqualiforfree Part Aand forOuatified 
DbbW Working Individuals (QDW) (refer to Section 19 for a detailed scptat\arion of these 
m). Unlii Part 8, the State does not have a Buy-ln agreemnl for Part A The State 
cannottherefore.wretroactiveeartAmgeasitdwforPartB&theBuy-ln 
agreement In addii, etWhen! of MeditCal redpients is ihited to SSA's o~en erodiment 
periods 
In-hSanceswherethetecipi.entdid natq@yforMedicarePartAJiiwithinhis/herseven m 
month Initial Enrollment Period (EP). the State is assesed a ten percent (10%) penalty for kite 
snrdtment The QDWl program offers a twelve (12) month grace perEod after the IEP to the Stale 
to begin payment of Part A premiums If the individual enrdis after the twelve (12) months. the 
State will then be assessed the ten percent (1 0%) perratty for late enrdlmerO Once the W and any 
~periodtras~anirrdividualmay~orrtydtaingtheGeneral~mentPeriod (W) 
OfJanuary~Matchwitheli~by~inJUly. 
SECTION: 50773 MANUAL NO.: 119 DATE- 811 1/93 PAGE: SF-2

[page 35]
MEDW EUGIBILIlY MANUAL- PROCEDURES SECTION 
A Medicare Part B Buy-ln 
(1) Part B Buy-ln #ruerage begins 
(a) ForSSI/SSP Recipients 
The fust mmIh an bdi k eligible for both Part B coversge and an 
=/ssp cash Pam 
The sec#d monthafter the month hwhM an indivldwl's dQWkyfar 
Medi k apptrrved,pfuuidiitheindiirrdk~forPartB 
cerveage. Appervedinthis~meansmedateonwhictrtheEW 
makes the determinarion !ha! & benefictary is eligible for MedW 
(a) Theendafthe~month.fotwMchan~rcal&~efor~ 
McLcal progmm 
(c) The end d the tast mah for which an Wid under sbdy-five (65) Is 
carsidered~orbliunderSocialSecurity. 
NOn? faMN- 
-.- 
6uy-h cawrage can end no eartier than the 
secorrd~beforethernonthin~SSA~theddetion 
recplestfromthestate. 
Part A cowage is paid by Medi for QMBs and QDWk not for the regdar Medii 
poputafion 
(a) ~sned~edto~re~nhanfree~~~ 
@) Has emdied in Part A and has met his/her Par$ A entMmm date. 
(2) QDY Part A awerage begins thew month in which an indiiua( k appmved for 
QDW -iand meetsthe~owingcriterta: 
(a) IsnotentitkdtoprenrhanfreeFartA 
@) Has enrolled in Part A and has met Nsjher Part A entttlement date. 
SECTION: Sn'3 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 119 DATE. 8/11/93 PAGE: IS-3

[page 36]
MEDI-CAL EUGIBIUN MANUAL - PROCEDURES SECTION 
(3) Part A coverage ends 
(a) The end of the hst month for which an individual is eligible for the QMB or 
QDWl program. 
@) The month in which an individual dies. 
(c) The end of the Last month for which an individual under six~y-five (65) is 
. entitled to Part A 
AGENCY RESPC)NSfBIUTIES * 
The Brry-in Premium Payment programs and atdomated systems ak adminis!ered jo'adty by the 
HealthCareF~Adminisbation(HCFA).theSocialSeWayAdminisnation(SSA),WState~ 
dHealthSewkes'PtemknnPaymentUnitandtheamties 
1. HEAL. CARE FlNANClNG MNISTRATION R1CFA) 
HCFA central aRice has averall responsibai for administration of the Buy-tn Agreement and the 
premiumPaymentprovisionsoftheSocialSeaaityAQ 
SSA ofiices are tesponsible for deemiring SSI/SSP eligibility, processing applications far Medicare, 
providing bfomaib about SSA and Medicare benePas and rephung lost or stden Medicare catds 
SSA providesthe Statewith infcmmbn onSSI/SSP.recipierbs by the way ofthe Stdte Data 
-(SDX)fite TheStatethenutaizesthiShlfOtm8iM)to~iShilTd~Med~ 
~~ay. 
3. PRmml M PAYMENT UNIT 
ft.leRemiumPa~Urrit~~arn~Alle&carePremhsnPaymentsystemswhfch 
-bW'lace wih federal Social Security systems and the State Medi-Cal EJi~ity Data System (MEDS). 
The Unit identi& and evaluates Medii ec@kn& who may be ~JW& to Medicare 
ques& additjOnal inbmatbn from counties 3 neebed, and with SSA to plaCe dl quafmed 
MediCal tecipierns onto the Buy-in, Ouaiified Medicare kwkWes (OMB) and QualiIW 0'i 
Working lndividrats (ODWI) progranrs. The actions of the Premium Payment Unit it a &ifl 
of medical costs from the State/fedeml Medi Program to the federal Wcfkae program 
A Identifying and Repom'srg Potentid Medicare Eligibles 
Counties deemhe Wi and/or QMB e@iM&y and enterdata on MEDS. The courdies 
atso det- QDWl elii and tarrsma infwmatKur . . - 0npOtenwOOWIeligitJesusiryl the Dectronic Mail &mmmamn CentetfloWy Puftomated Olke (EMQFAO) system 
TheStateuseshEDSandQWDiirdormaoiontoidentity~MedkzwetJigibles. 
r;nformatiocr such as name, ssc. date af birth, Med'i eligibility effecliw date and the 
Health Insurance CJaim (HIC) wmber is edited and matched with records at SSA and HCFA 
SECTlON: 50113 MANUAL NO.: 119 DATE 8/11/93 PAOE: 1-

[page 37]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
Central Offices to determine whether Medi-Cal eligibles may also qualify for the 
Medicare program. 
B. Verification of Data Reported 
Procedures established by CMS require a match of more than one characteristic of 
an individual's case in order to locate a corresponding record on CMS's Health 
Insurance Master file. All of the information collected by the county EW must be 
I 
complete and accurate to be of maximum benefit. It is important to verify that the 
HIC number is correct by checking the beneficiary's Medicare card. Additionally. 
when a disabled beneficiary received hislher disability claim number (Title II), it 
should be reported to MEDS since it can also be used for Buy-In andlor QMB 
purposes. 
C. Dealing with Incomplete Information 
If the applicant is unable to provide the county EW with the necessary'information 
(such as age, citizensh~p, or lawful alien status and residency), the county must 
assume the burden of establishing the applicant's medical insurance eligibility or 
refer the case to the Premium Payment Unit. If the applicant refuses to provide 
information needed to determine Medicare status, the county musl deny Medi-Cal 
eligibility due to lack of cooperation. 
D. Informing the Beneficiary 
The county EW should advise the applicant of the following: 
IlI Bv filino an a~~lication for Medicare benefits. the individual mav establish . , 
e;ltitler;;ent to'~ed1care Part B. If an individua~wishes to enroll in ihe QMB or 
QDWl programs. helshe must first establish Part A eligibility. 
(2) Refusal to apply for Medicare benefits may result in a denial of Medi-Cal 
benefits. 
E. Establishing Medicare Entitlement 
If an applicant has yet to establish Medicare entitlement, the county EW must refer 
the applicant to the nearest local SSA district office lo apply for Medicare benefits. It 
is very important that the applicant establishes Medicare entitlement so that the State 
may defer costs of medical services to Medicare. 
F. Handling Premium Payment Problems 
The Premium Payment Unit is available to assist in resolving county Buy-In. QMB 
and QDWl problems. Counties are encouraged to use the services of this unit. 
SECTION NO.: 50773 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 298 DATE: 10/04/05 1 SF-5

[page 38]
- 
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
To resolve a Buy-In andlor QMB problem that has been detected by a county, complete and 
forward form DHS 6166 to: 
Department of Health Services 
Medicare Operations Unit 
MS 4719 
P.O. Box 997422 
Sacramento, CA 95899-7422 
To resolve a QDWI problem that has been detected, send all pertinent information to the 
Premium Payment Unit via the Totally Automated Office (TAO). 'E-Mail for QDWI" screen, found 
in the forms section of TAO. 
MEDICARE PREMIUM PAYMENT PROCESSES AND SYSTEMS 
Medi-Cal recipients who are eligible for Medicare Part A andlor Part B benefits are identified via the State 
Medi-Cal Eligibility Data System (MEDS) which is maintained through State, county and federal Social 
Security Administration (SSA) data input. The State issues a Medi-Cal card each month. Fmm that 
action, the State Medi-Cal and Medicare Premium Payment systems are alerted and. when appropriate. 
Premium Paymenl activity is initiated for eligibility beneficiaries by the State of CMS. 
1 MEDICARE PREMIUM PAYMENT SYSTEM 
The month-lo-month operations of the Medicare Part B Buy-In and Part A QMB programs are 
accomplished though an automated exchange of data between the State and SSA. The State 
computer file, containing accretion and deletion records for potential Medicare eligibles who are on 
a county-administered Medi-Cal Program, is sent to SSA in Baltimore. Maryland. no later than the 
25" of each month in order to be included in the next month's Premium Payment update 
operations. 
The Premium Payment Unit maintains the Stale's Medicare Part B Buy-In and Part A Premium 
Payment systems which interface with federal Social Security systems and MEDS. These 
automated svstems are desianed to Dav the Medicare Part B andlor Part A ~remiums for the Medi- 
Cal program. The ~ualified Disabled working individual (QDWI) program'is the only program not 
fully incorporated into MEDS and the automated Buy-In and Premium Payment systems. 
2. MEDI-CAL AND MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY DATA SYSTEM (MEDS) MEDICARE CODING 
The two digit Medicare status codes on MEDS (refer to next page) identify Medicare Part A andlor 
Part B coveraae for eligible Medi-Cal recidents. These codes are translated to a one-diait code on 
the Medi-Cal &rd which alerts providers to the type of Medicare coverage available to a beneficiary 
and is used to determine if Medicare must be billed prior to billing Medi-Cal. 
3. COUNTY ALERTSIMESSAGES 
County AlertslMessages are generated to the counties as part of the monthly processi~ of the 
Buy-In Response File received from CMS for Medicare part A and Part B. ~hese ~ler~~issages 
provide county staff with a quick reference to the updated status of each eligible beneficiary under 
SECTION NO.: 50773 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 298 DATE: 10/04/05 15F-6

[page 39]
MEDI-CAL EUGIBIUN MANUAL - PROCEDURES SECTION 
his/her control without having to access MEDS. AlMs/tulessages are med in the sequence each 
cornrty has requested. Messages are generated only for cunent active county- recipients 
or for OMBs. 
The fdlowing is a Summary Table of the Buy-In County Alerts/Messages each county receives: 
HlWO CHANGED. BY.PREMIUM PAYMENT UNIT OR SSA 
This alert kdomrsawntystafFthateithefSSAorthePremhrm~aymentunit haschangedthebeneficiary's 
HIC nwnber on MEDS. Data elemems associated with this alert diiy the new HIC number from the 
transaction, the dd HIC number from MEDS. and the HICSOURCE. 
RESPONSE: County records should be updated 10 reflect the new HIC number so that if elgibili is 
terminated and later reestablshed. the iatw HIC n-~rnber will be.reported to MEDS. 
SECTION: 50m bAANUAL NO,: 1 19 DATE: 8/11/93 PAGE: 1s-7

[page 40]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBIUTY MANUAL - PROCEDURES SECTION 
8004 CLOSED PERIOD ACCRmON (part B only) 
This is an infonnabml aien to inform county staff that a Buy-in accretion transaction coverbrg a history 
period has been received from SSA Data elements associated with this den dispby the HIC number and 
the Buy* UfeChe Date. 
RESPONSE: No response necessary. 
BDQS DISABLED BUT NOT YET ELIGIBLE FOR MEDICARE 
This is an infomrational alert to infonn county s&ff that-an accretion tamadion was rejected by W!imore 
with a slams code indii that the qnt is not yet eligibIe for Medicare but wal be as soon as the 
~periodis~etedasind~&bytheDateofMedicateEntitlement DatadementsasocbW 
withthisdertdi@aythe HIC -and the Date of Medicare En&brmt 
RESPONSE: No response necessary 
8006 ACCREnON FAILED HCFA MATCH CRITERIA 
This alert indii that an attempt to purchase Medicare #weage was rejected by HCFA because the 
recipierd--- . . n did not match any red on HCFA's Health lnsumrtce Master File. Data 
elemerds assxkted with this alert display the HE number and the Bvy-Ln ERective Da&. hEDS will Miale 
a Buy-In a#retiosl for anyone in a potential Medicare covered aid code who is not identiFied as a Medicare 
. Wigibieaknand~. 
A has a HIC number on MEDS; 
6. is age sbby-five (65) or over, or. 
C. isehgibleinabiiior~aid~. 
If the acmtb attempt did not match a record on HCFA's Health Insurance Master Fiie, the system is 
unable to cordirm wlWher or not the Wi recipient is entitled to Mediire. 
RESPONSE: The response win vary depending on the fdlanmrg cb#nnstances: 
A If the redpient is sbdy-five (65) yean 05 age or over. and: 
1. recipient is an aged alien who is breIigble for Medicare, enter the 1- and . . bkmkatm Service (INS) entry date and the aiien -diw code of 9 dii onto MEDS. 
This process Wn suppress Medii indii cadi on tfie Medii card: 
2 recipient~notyetappflediorM~~~~e.noffytherecipierddthereqrPiement 
to apply for Mdcare coverage as a &in of Media eIiii or 
3. neahw 1. nor 2. apply. check for probierrrs as noted under item 2 below. 
SECTION: 50m MANUAL LETTER NO.: I 19 DATE: 8/11/93 PAGE: SF4

[page 41]
MEDI-CAL EUGlBlllTY MANUAL - PROCEDURES SECTION 
B. If the recipient is a dialysis digibie w if you have infonrration confimdng that the recipient 
is either receiving Social Secinity di&y benefits (TI It) or is erbirled to Medimre mge; and 
7. the HIC number and/or sex on MEDS is incorrect. submit a cwrection to update MEDS 
using the approp&!e EW Bansaction: 
2. the name and/or birtMate on MEDS does not match kdormation on the redpient's 
Mediire Card or his/her disabili TUle ti) award letter from SS4 report !he name and 
birtMae information from the Mediire Card or award Imef to the Remium Payment Unit 
on Form WS 6166 to update the alternate narne/bkhWe infomalion on MEDS; and. 
3. neither1. nor2~.reportthax*~to~PtwnhanPaymentUrritonformDHS 
6166. ThePremiwnPaymerdUnitwilI#m~actSSAtoresdvetheproblemtharispreventing 
the Premium Payment accretion from matching HCFA's file. 
C. When the recipient is under 65. is not receiving Social Sew dii benefib (Time II), is no5 
ent&d to Medii coverage; and 
1. the HIC number diqlayed with this message is blank, no action is reqtrired; 
2. the HIC number dii with this message is not blank, submit rhe appropriate M 
trarrsacbcm to remove the HIC rnanber from MEDS. 
8007 STATE lNmATED ACCREnON 
This alert bdorms CDMty W fhat a Srafe h&!ed Buy-In accretion famaclion.was accepted by HCFA 
Dasa elements assodated with this alert dii the HIC number and W Buy-in Effective Date. 
RESPONSE: No response mcesary- 
8008 FED IMTIATED. STATE CONTROLLED ACCRETION 
Tiis is an -hfomShd alert to inform county staff that an acaetion transaction was iniWed by HCFA A 
HCFA inirkred acaetion action nomatly results &her from a wmpbhl or from a Medii applicard 
reporting Mediil eiigibai. The &la elements associated with this alert diiy !he HJC number and the 
Ekry4n Eifective Date. 
RESPONSE: No response necessary. 
&009 FED DELETlON INEUGIBE FOR MEDICARE 
This Aef? informs county staff that a dele!ion transaction was inil&ed by HCFA becawe, accMding to 
HCFA it appears that the Medi-Cal redpient does not meet eIigiWii byuimment~ for Medicare. Data 
dements asoc&ed with !his alert diiy the HIC number and the Bvy-ln Effective Date. 
RESPONSE: If the Medi-Cai recipient believes that he/she is entitled to Medicare, refer fecipient to an SSA 
district mi. 
SECTIDN: 50'273 WUA~ LEITER NO.: 1 19 DATE: 8/11/93 PA= t5F-9

[page 42]
MED- EUGlBIW MANUAL - PROCEDURES SECTlON 
801 1 FED INITIATED OELRlON 
This is an infomatbai alerr to Worm county s!aff that a deletion transaction was med by HCFA based 
on either a comptaht, a problem memorandurn or other wrinen request to terminate Medicare Part A and/or 
B. Da!a elements assocbted with this aiert dispiay tt~e HIC number and the Buy-in Effective Date. 
RESPONSE: No responSe V- 
90W ACTIVE MEW RECIPIENT - DECEASED PER HCFA 
This deft infomrs cwnty staff UKU eaher a State initiated accretion transaction was rejected by HCFA or 
HCFA iniWed a deletion tmnsactionbecarrse, accordii ro .HCFk this beneficiary is deceased. MEDS 
shows this beneficiaty as a crarerPfy ac!be Medii.recipient .Data ekments assocbted with this alert 
dii the MC number and the Buy-In Eff&ve Date. 
RESPONSE Catmy staff shoutd verity whether the rec@knt is in fact deceased and. if so. temrbrate 
Medi-Cal di. tf the recipierd is noz deeased, refer recipknt to an SSA district aRice to conect the 
pr- 
9005 ACTIVE MEDI-CAl RECIPIENT - OUT-OF-STATE PER HCFA 
This alert informs county Saff thaf acuxdbg to HCFA, this recipient has changed the state of residence 
to a state other than Caliiomia MEDS shows !his mc@ient as a currentty active Medii recipient The 
dara elemerds associated with this alert diy the HIC number and the Boy-ln Effective Date. 
This aiert infons wunty staff that the State's a#retion attempt fa Part B Buy-In for a QMB die has 
been rejected by HCFA because, acuxdbg to HCFk this rec@knl is not entitled to Medicare Part A 
Nonentafement to Medii Part A would make a recipient ineiigaJe as a QMB. Data dements associated 
with this alert the HIC number and the Buy-In Effective Date. 
RESPONSE County staff should verify if the recipient has amhm~km of Part A dement and. if 
temrinate QMB eliity. if the redpient Wi that he/* is amemjy entitled to Medicare Part A 
BeneMs, refer recipient to. an SSA district ,aQfice to cone~t the problem. if the recipient does have 
co&math of Part A entitlement, send proof of Part A enWemmt along with a DHS 6166 corn* fom, 
t0thePlemhanPaymerdUni.t 
* NOTE. UlED~aler?sthat read PCWW ~u~4na~e64 -9 morrths or owfa 
generatedforcountyhfcnmhnandusa ~ountyEWsshor9deitherassisttheMedi-Cal 
recipient to enroll into the Medicare Part B Buy-ln Rogram or enter the INS enby date and 
alien code 9 on MEDS. 
SECTION: 50?73 MANUAL LEITER NO,: 11 g DATE 8/11/93 Pm IS-10

[page 43]
MEDK=AL EUGtBILfTY MANUAL - PROCEDURES SECTlON 
6. DATA EXCHANGE WRH SSA 
The SWe processes Medicare PaR B Buy-fn. OMB and QDW tapes for transmission to Baltimore Data 
RPcessing (E3DP). Accretiorrs/deletions are processed in BDP around the 25th calendar day of each month. 
HCFA hitiales actions for Part B SSI beneficiaries; the State is responsible for non-SSI beneficiaries. QMBs 
and QDWls. A separate We. Third Party Master (TPM), is maintained by BDP to control premhnn billing to 
states and other ttrird-party payers. These tapes contain acaetions, deletions or changes for Buy-In, QMB 
and QDWl beneficiaries. 
BUY-iN EFFECTM DATE FOR MEDICALLY NEEDY (MN) PERSONS 
In order to amply with Federal requirements for determining the Bvy-ln efiectiw date, counties must report 
Medi appro~l date to MEDS for potenW Buy-tn-of MN nqxerus 
*. ' 
- Thisapproval date k required for 
each new period of MN elii timl is not contiguws with prior el'i. (Prior eiigibiii can indude 
Supplemental Security In#rme/State Supplemental Program or Aid to Famiiii wah Dependent Children 
cash eligibai which automatidly confened WcCal eligMi). 
Buy* coverage for a qualM Aged. Blind or Disabled MN eligible beneficiary begins the second month 
after the month in which Media eiigiba'i is approved for medii asisme, unless the indii was 
a Public Arsistance (PA) or other PA eligible m the month immediatety preceding the month in which MN 
e@Wty began The two month kg time for an MN Eligible BeneSidary is aubmk&y calcutated by the 
State fmm the date of el'ii apptaval by the county. When a beneficiary receiving Medicate changes 
from PA to MN status, there should be contkwous Buy-ln and the two month tag time does not apply. 
Apprwai datemeansthe monthand yearmwhich the EJiiWolker makeshe determmmon . - tm 
the beneficiary is eligible fw MediCal. For exampie. an appficant applies for Medi-Cal on May 5. 1992. 
requesting rermauive coverage to Febntary.1992. On June 20.1992. !he EW determines the i3pplicant is 
eliiretroactivetoFebnsry1992 fhe~dateinthiscaseisJ~1992. 
Theappmddateshcdd berqxxtedonEW05. EW20 wEW30tmsahnsm es!a&h nw MN 
eligbili on MEDS: (1) when the redpierd is a potenlid Medicare eliie (aged, blind, or disabkd, including 
chronic renal disease); or, (2) the mipknt is AFDCMN and either has a valid HlC number with an 'A'. or 
W prefk: or an A J1-4. M. MI or f strffk. or is ow age 65. 
Any overstated shares of cost resul?hg from the 'third month' Buy-In assumption [LC, asmption mat 
Buy-in will occur in the second mwdh after the nmnlh in which eiigWii is approved) can be adjusted in 
hter mwdhs as provided in Titie 22. Section 506533. Adjusanents should however, be mbimal. 
QUAUFIED DISABLED -KING INOMDUALS (OWD1) PROGRAM 
Section 6408(d) of the Omnibus Bodget ReccmSiiation Act of 1989 (OBRA 89) reqtrbes that the State pay 
Part A Medicare premiums for individuals who lost Tie li and Medicare benefits due to earned income 
abwe the requid Substantial Gainfui Aaivity (SGA) li beghhg Jlriy 1. 1990. Unlike the QUdified 
Medicare Beneficiary Program (OMB). States are-not required to pay coinsurance and deductibles or the 
Part B premium A QDWl is eligible to wdt in.prsmium Medicare Pan A Hospital insurance, under a 
special pragram and: 
o has not attained age 65; 
SECTION: 507?3 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 1 19 DAE 811 1/93 PAGE: 15F-11

[page 44]
MEDKAL EUGlBlUTY MANUAL - PROCEDURES SECTION . 
o has been entitled to disability inswance benefits under Tie 11; 
o continues to have a dii phystcal or mental condition; 
o has lost TiUe I1 beneiits due to earnings exceeding the SGA limb; 
0 is not athenrvise erditled b Medii; 
0 whase incurne does not exceed the incume level established ar an amount 
of 200% of the federal income poverty line; 
o whose momes do not ereeed twice the SSl standad;. and 
A QDWl is cursidered a Medi recipim and must meet all other candiions of efigibiiity such as aing an - - appbbm, dtbenstrip, status reporting. etc; therefwe, an OBRA Jien is not &ie for QDWI 
benefas. 
Due to the snafl number of QDWl eligibles. MEDS wiU not carry QDWl records. nor issue the QDWls 
Mebi cards Instead QDWI records win be esW&ed by county reporting ebgiidy using the 
Ektmic W System and maintained manually by the Premium Payment Una QDWl 
benetieiarieswinrseaMedicarecardissuedbytheSociaimAdmbrisbationtoobSain#wered 
medicalcare. 
County~hatdrepon~~wl digiMiitothek~ymenUnitviathe~UI~~7~0fom 
screennolaterthanthel7thafthe~ TbPrerrrhrmPayment UnitwiilthennatifyHealthCare 
~~~CFA)obQDWIaccrebionranddelebjonsbythe25th0fthe~ The 
PrenrirrmPayment~winthen~ttlecwntyEw,rtrrorrghE-Mail,whenHCFAcordimrs;m 
aamion/deletion ~maycoaauthePremiumPaymentmtegarding~011~ 
or to correa or revise a QDWl recud. Use the E-Mail address 'Buy-In'. 
3. E-MAIL SCREEN 
Fdlowing is a copy of the 'E Maa for QDW screen and its instNctions To the EM=/TAO 
screen for QDWls, sign on ttPough MEDS. At the EMC2flAO User Menu select optb 
bubthbaard TheaOWIformistrmr#iunderoption'forms~- Thefintscreentoappear~be 
the 'EW for QDWI' screen. Compkte all apprtcable fields A second screen provides irrstruetiorrs 
foraddbrgot~eiigbieswittIinthe~edfieMs 
SECTION: Smt3 UUNUAL NO-: 1 19 DATE: 8/11 /93 PAGE: 15F-12

[page 45]
- ~~ 
MEDW UlGlBlUTY MANUAL - PROCEDURES SECTlON 
4. DUAL ELIGIBIUTY 
The Department of Xeatth Services @HS) will pay Medicare Part A premiums from State funds for 
Dually Uiible QDWls (imdividuaJs receiving Medi-CaJ after meeting their share d cwt or W a 
share of cost), thus allowing coverage of this group. 
5. MEDICARE PART A ENROLLMENT PERIODS 
The Medicare Part A Initial Enroilrnent Period (IEP) for a QDWl begins with the month in which the 
individual receives notice that hisjher Part A benefits under the reguhr Medimre program will end 
due to excess earnings and ends 7 months iater. 
Forthaseenrdliduringthe IEP. berefitsbegin eitherrhefintdayofthe secwdmoahafterthe 
monthaf~~orthefirstdayofthethird~de~m~the~uaienrdls. 
rtthe irdirral fa& to enrdl for Medicare Part A benefits during the IEe. he/& must wait until 
the General Enrollment Period (GEP) of January through March. Those who enrdi in the GEP witl 
norreceivebeneditsuntaJ~. 
Medicare entitlement under these provisions ends when an bditral is either no longer disabled. 
tequestsvolltntary- 
-. of the coverage. becomes eligible for Medii under some other 
pmvision (iie, premium free Medire), tails to pay the required premiums, or no longer meets 
Ji factors, 
QUALIFIED MEDICARE BENEFICWRY fOMB) PROGRAM 
Section 301 ofthe Medii catstrophic Co=age Act (MCCA) of 1988 requires- State to paythe -. Medii Part A and B cost sharing apems for certain low income Medicare beneficranes Cost 
expemes are: 
o Prwnbnns ($221.00 for Part A if nor aMJable free, and $36.60 for Part B fn 19%); 
o DducWe ($676-00 for Pan A and $100.00 for Part B in 1993); and 
o Coinsurance fees in Part A and B. 
Due to the need for Srate legklatkm Camomia was granted a waiver to delay mpl- of the CM.8 
pogramuntaJaruJary1.1990. 
A) Meet the OM0 pmpetty requirements under the reg* MediCal program or have net 
no- property. as determined for a QMB, at or beicrw twice Camomia's regular 
Medi property limits; 
B) Meet the QMB income standard. That is, a QMB must have n& nonexempt 'm at Or 
Wow 100% of the fed& poverty level; 
C) Be eiigble for Part A Medicare hospirtal insurance with or wahout a premium; and, 
SECTION: som MANUALE~ER NO.: 119 DATE: 8/11/93 PAGE: ts-13

[page 46]
MWtCAL EUGZBIUN MANUAL - PROCEDURES SECnOIJ 
D) Be otherwise digible for Medii, ie.. meet all other Media requireme* such as 
Wiomia residency and linkage (eg.. being aged, Mi, disabled). 
QUAUFIED MEDICARE BENEFICIARIES 
There are two groups of QMBs: 
A QAAB Dual; 
Those receiving regutar, full scope Media eaher as cash grant redpients (e-g, 
Supplemental Seanity In#wne/SWe Supplemental Rogram (=/SSP)) or Medicalfy 
Needy (MN) beneficiaries. These eiigibIes already meet the Medi plow 
(OM8 property lii -are .two times the MediCaf pmperty limits) and must be 
deermind to meet the OMB incum reqtlirement Titis group is dttaPy elie fie. 
. eligible for regular Mec&Cal and UMB beneSits), 
Those eIigble as QMB Only do not want reg* Medii or are'- eligible for reguQr 
Medii due topsoperty above the regutarMediiCalpropertylimitsbut~mexcess 
0ftheQMB.propertyri. 
3. Am CODE 
Aid code 80 was &abIi&hed as the aid code to iderrtij. QMB eliii. Dual eiigbles will have bath 
a regdar MedCCal aid code and the OhdB aid code QhdB Ody dies will have just the QMB aid 
code. The indii mhW in the Specia) Program 1 segment of MEDS is used !o show UMB 
di. 
4. MEDICARE PART A AND B ENROLLMENT PERIODS 
A Part A Enrollment 
1) If an MNiduaJ is not already mehbg Medicare Part 4 appblkm fot Part A can - 
be made only. 
a Draing the Initial Enrdmen! Period (1EP): 
0 Noeariierthantfvee monthsbeforeage65 butno~tfr;ulthree 
mordhs after the indiuaI's 65th birhday. 
o After 24 matdhs of receivirtg Title II dkab%ty benefa, to be 
effective in the 25th month. 
b. During the Special Enrollment Period m), which is the month after an 
individual Stops working if he/* is wer 65. 
SECTION: 50T73 MANUAL EITEF4 NO2 1 19 DATE: 811 1/93 PAGE 1s-14

[page 47]
MEDI-CAL UJGIBIUP/ MANUAL - PROCEDURES SECTION 
c During the General ENdlment Period (GEP) of Jawy - March to be 
effective rhe fdlowing July, for a Medicare beneQiciary who did not end 
in an IEP or SEP. Su,& eiigibles must apply at the SociaJ .Security 
Ad- (SSA) odfice during the GEP. If they fail to do so. they 
would have to wait until the ne>d year's GEP and wouid not be eligIbte for 
Part A Medicare and therefore QblB rm5a July of hat year. 
An kdividual who does not apply for Part A at the fast opportunity is charged a 
10% penatty by SSA Undw the QMB prom the State will pay the penalty fw 
a Medicare beneficiary's late enrdlment in Part A 
1) Part B enrollment #iteria for an individual not on Buy-Ln are the same as for Part 
A however, forthose individlrals who are Medii and/or OMB eligible, 
theGEP.SEPorIEPiswaived. TheStatemaybeginpayingthePartBpremiton 
after conditions of eligibility are met (ia, benefits for a WB Ordy begin no &kr 
than the month after the date of county approval). 
2) Thefe are Part B penah& for late enrdlrnent similar to those of late ewdtment for 
Partk-bwew, underZheBvy-lnagteemenf theSrateisnot chargedapemky 
for Medicare beneficiaries who would otherwise be assessed a penalty fot late 
emchent in Part B. 
QMB BENEFITS EFFECTIVE DATE - 
QMB~may&eRectiveEhefirstofthe~fdlowingthe~eofapproval~~.~ofthe 
morrth following the date the coun¶y makes the determination of eliii) ik 
A) Benefickq is already ewdled in Patt A; or 
6) Benefidary enrdls in Part A during */her IEP or SEP. If a beneficiary ertrdls in Part A 
dwing the W, QMB benefas may be effective the fdlosving Jdy. There are no tetroadive 
QMB benefits 
6. PART A AND B COVERAGE ENDS 
A) The end of the hst morith during which an individuaI is eligible for the QMB progmm; Or. 
7. FEDERAL FINANCIAL PARTlClPATlON 
Although Medi pays Mediire Part 6 premiums, or %uys-ino, for Medically Needy 0 
bemfkiaries because it is cost effective. the MediCal Program amenUy does mt receive Federal 
Faranciai Participation (FFP) h Part B premiums for MNs. WBh rhe implemenration of the OW 
program, FFP is avaaabie for MNs who are also eligible for the QMB progtam. Thus, i! is to the 
SECTION: 50773 MANUAL LRTER NO.: 119 DATE: 8/11/93 PAGE 1s-15

[page 48]
MEDEAL EUGlBlLCrY MANUAL - PROCEDURES SECTtON 
State's aduanrage to end MN individuals with free Part A as OMBs. 8 eligible. The State receives 
FFPforpaymeraod~ PartApremhrms 
MEDICARE CODJNG. MEDI-CAL CARDS AND MEDLCAL WGlBnrrY DATA SYSTEM MEDS) 
Medicare cod'i on MEDS is dm from infwmaion on the MEDS Medicare Buy-tn brfMmation screen. 
MEDS BENDM Tale I1 information screen and MEDS Mi saeen Counties are not able to 
dii input w change the Medicare Coding on the MEDS Medicare Status Line. Hawever, 3 a ooding 
enw is deeaed, Bi Worlcers 0 strould detaa the problem on the State BWn Problem Report 
Form @HS6166) and send it totheptemitnn Paymerrt Unit (seesecthn 15F%eporting Roblemstothe 
State's Remhrm Payment UW). 
1. MEDICARE CODING ON MEDq 
The MEDS Wi status Line shaws Medicare Part A and Part B entitiernen! informath as well 
aswheaherapremiumisrequhedandwhopaystheprerrdran . ' 
The MEDS'Wkare Stabs codes are shown Wow. The left di indicates the Medicare Part A 
status,whiletherig&diiindicatestheMedicarePartB~ 
PAKT A PART B 
BiankfO-NoMedicarePmA Btank/O - No Medicare Part B 
1- PaidbyBmeficiary 1 - Paid by Benediciary 
2 - Paid by State 2- Paidbystate 
3 - Free 3 - Not Appri 
4- Notapplie 4 - Paid by Other Entity . 
5 - Bl Reject BENDEX Eligible 1/ 5 - BI Reject. BENDM Elme 1 / 
6 - ' BJ Reject Presumed Eiigitde 1/ 6- BIReject.ResumedEligibie~/ 
7 - Presumed Eligible 7- etesumedEiiie 
8 - BI Rejed. Not Presumed 8 - Bi Reject Not Presumed 
.Eiiiibie I/ E3igible 1/ 
1 / BI Reject means a rejection by Social Secra'by Admaustrat##r -. - (SSA) of the Statens aaempt to BwJn 
SECTIDN: 50lt3 LRTER NO: 119 DATE: 8/11 /93 PAGE: 1s-I6

[page 49]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
2. MEDICARE CODING ON MEDI-CAL ID CARDS 
The Medicare lndicator codes which appear on the Medi-Cal ID cards are shown below. The Automated 
Eligibility Verification System which answers provider inquiries regarding Medi-Cal eligibility also uses the 
following codes' 
Blank - No Medicare Coverage 
1 Medicare Part A Coverage Only 
2 - Medicare Part B Coverage Only 
3 Medicare Part A and B Coverage 
This coding alerts providers to the type of Medicare coverage for which the recip~ent is eligible so they can 
determlne if Medicare should be billed prior to billing Medi-Cal. For example, if the recipient's Medi-Cal 
card shows and indicator of '1" P part^ only), a hospital will know it must bill ~edicare for inpatient 
sewices. 
3. HAND TYPED CARDS 
In those rare instances where counties are required to hand type an MC 301 Medi-Cal card, the following 
procedures should be followed: 
0 If the beneficiary is over 65 years old and has not met the 5 year residency requirement, leave 
the Medicare lndicator blank to indicate no Med~care entitlement. If he or she is not identified 
as an alien. Medicare Part B eligibility is presumed, so use an indicator of "2"; 
0 Use a Medicare lndicator of "1" if the beneficiary has proof of entitlement from Medicare Part 
A only; and. 
0 Use a Med~care indicator of '3" if the beneficialy has proof of eligibility from Medicare for both 
Part A and Part B. 
The Department of Health Service's Premlum Payment Unit is'available to assist in resolving county Buy- - 
In problems. Each county is encouraged to use the services of this unit when regular Buy-In procedures 
to not accomplish lhe desired result. Prior to reporting problems to the State's Premium Payment Unit, 
the MEDS INQB "Buy-In and BENDEX Information" screen should be reviewed for the current Buy-In 
status. 
When incorrect information is discovered in any of the screen's fields, attach a printout of the INQB 
screen to a State Buy-In Problem Report (DHS 6166), enter the nature of the error and the correct 
information in the "Remarks" section of the form and mail to: 
State of California 
Department of Health Services 
Medicare Operations Unit 
P.O. Box 997422 
Sacramento, CA 95899-7422 
-- 
SECTION NO.: 50773 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 298 DATE: 10/04/05 15F-17 
-

[page 50]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
COUNTY PROCEDURES FOR COUNTY ADMINISTERED PERSON 
In order to resolve a Buy-In problem, provide the following information on the DHS 6166. All data is 
needed to fully describe the case in question and enable the State to determine the appropriate 
period of Buy-In eligibility. 
1. Health Insurance Claim (HIC) number. Social Security, or RR HIC number. 
2. Name. 
3. Sex. 
4. Date of birth. 
5. County code, aid code, case number. family budget unit and person's number (use the 
appropriate 14-digit case identification for each period of eligibility identified for this individual). 
6. Beginning effective date (for each closed period of Medi-Cal eligibility in which there is a 
discrepancy). 
7. Ending effective date (for each closed period of Medi-Cal eligibility in which there is a 
discrepancy). 
8. For Medically Needy recipients, we need the eligibility approval dale as described in Section 15F 
'Buy-In Effective Date for Medically Needy (MN) persons". 
RESOLUTION TIME 
Considerable time is needed to correct Buy-In Medicare coding problems. The time required for a 
problem resolution results from a long sequence of activities involving the processing of an 
individual problem through county, State and Social Security Administration (SSA) channels and 
numerous data processing files. 
For example, a beneficiary complaining about a premium should expect a minimum wait of four 
months from the time of the complaint until the billing is corrected by SSA. Once a problem is 
resolved, a beneficiary must allow SSA 90 to 120 days to refund erroneously deducted or paid 
premiums. 
SSI BUY-IN PROBLEMS 
Refer lo Sections 148 and 14E of the Medi-Cal Eligibility Manual for handling of Supplemental 
Security IncomeIState Supplementary Payment Medi-Cal card coding problems. 
SECTION NO.: 50773 MANUAL LElTER NO.: 298 DATE: 10/04/05 15F-18

[page 51]
MEDXAL ELIGIBILITY MANUAL - PROCEDURES SECTION 
lNQB SCREEN FORMAT AND DEFNIITIONS 
The following are the field definitions.for the Buy-In and BENDM segments of the INQB screen: 
MDS BUY-IN AND BENEFICIARY AND EARNINGS DATA EXCHANGE (BEND= INQUIRY (INQB) 
SCREEN 
This MEDS screen (exampie shawn below) provides various data to askt county staff in determining the 
Buy-In status of Medi-Cal eligibles. Refer to Appendix 1 for INQB Screen Definitions. 
IN50 * BUY-IN AND BENDEX INFORMATION " 
MEDS-ID NAME MEDS-CUR-MMW 
A HlC-NO D. HICSOURCE F. BUYJN-EUG-CD 
B. CUR-BW-IN-STATUS E. BWJN-EFF-DT G. LAST-PART-SCHG 
C. DOME-DT ------------- - - - - - - - - - - - - - MmJCARE PARf 'A' BUY-IN INFORMATION= = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = 
H CUR-BW-IN-STATUS J. BW-IN-EFF-DT K LAST-PARTA-CHG 
I. DOME-DT 
------------------- ------------------- BENDMTIN:lI lwORMAnON====================== 
L CLAIM40 U. LAST-BENDEX-CHG 
M. INmALm-DAlE 0. BENDEX-PAYSTATUS V. COMMUNICATION-CODE 
N OU)BENEFIldAAT$ R. HI-ENTL-DATE W. SMLENTL-DATE 
0. CURgENmfdMT t S. HI-TERM-DATE X SMI-TERM-DATE 
P. DUAL-ENTL-IND T. HI-OPTION-CD Y. SMI-CODE 
Z PREMIUM-PAYOR 
W - ENTER Qk0F,Qii,aNLQO.QP,QXQ1 .MXC.XE,XM,XN ENTER KEY WlURNS TO UST 
BUY-IN AND BENDEX lNOU1RY (INOB) SCREEN DEnNmONS 
1. MEDICARE PAR7 B INFORMATION SEGMEM MflNmONS 
A HIC-NO (?-iea!th I- aabn Number) 
This fdd will sttow the current HIC number 3 it was reported by eaher the county or federal 
government (for WCSOLIRCE, see letler 0); othemrise a blank will show. The HlC number 
Shawn may not be the coned HIC number. 
B. CUR-BUYJN-STATUS (Cumen! Buy-In Status) 
The following is a list of valid Buy-In Status Codes with explanatiorts: 
Valid Buv-In Status Cadets) Exdarratian 
Codes 
Used by the Sate to accrete an iridiiual to the 
1. State Initiated Accretions State's ~u~-ln Program Expect response from 
SECTION: 50Tf3 MANUAL LRTER NO.: 119 DATE: 8/ 11/93 PAGE: IS-19

[page 52]
MEDJ-CAL EUGIBIUN MANUAL - PROCEDURES SECTION 
2 State Controlled 
1161, 1164, 1165,1167 
3. State Initiated Deletions 
50.51.53.81 
HCFA within one month from the mrd date. 
An accretion submitted by the State has been 
added to the Buy-ln Program. 
Used by the State to delete an individual from the 
State's Buy-ln Program. Expect response from 
HCFA withim one month from cuneIlt date- 
A deleti& subm'bed by the State has been 
dropped from the Buy-ln Program. 
5. federal Controlled Informs the State that HCFA has estabiii a 
Accretions 1180 Buy-ln record on the Rtird Party Master (PM) 
File for an SSI recipient The acmetion was 
added to the Buy-ln f rogram. 
6. Federal ConWled HCFA informs the Stare that an SSI recipierrt was 
Deletions 1500, 1600, deleted from the OMB Part A program. 
1728.1759,1787 
7. Interim/Special lnformstheState~atthoughthereiSn0 
1800.1900.3200.3300. evidence of Medicare entitkment a dam for 
3662 ~isbeingdevelopedbySocial~ 
10. DOME 
2200 
12 Biank 
lrdwms the' sate m the subm'med BuyJn 
Aecretbn~wasrejeuedbecawed 
ems): HIC nrrmber, effective date, ek 
/DeMiibrader~ . . Bvy-tn - 
Expecl a response from HCFA within one month 
from current date. 
1ndic;ites PmpeAim Medicare Entitlement (For 
Date d Medii Entitlement, see Letter C Mow). 
Indies prospective Wcare entitiement for 
Aged Aiiens (for Date Of Med'i Erditlemerrt 
see lener C below). 
indicates no Current Buy-In AUjvity- 
SECTIOX: ~1173 MANUAL LETTER NO.: I 19 DATE: 8/11 /93 PAGE: 15F-20

[page 53]
- 
MEDkCAL EUGIBIUN MANUAL - PROCEDURES SECTION 
C. DOME-DT (Date of Medire Entitlement) (MMm 
This field indicates the prospective Medie Entitlement Date unless there is tennixition 
of Diii Benefii. 
Fot State Use Only. fhis fieid cuntains an intend code that identifies the county. 
federal or State system through which the HIC number was hst reported. 
E BW-IN-EW-~ (Effective Date) (MM/W) 
This field indies Efiective month and'year, of cunent Buy-ln sratus 
F, BUY-IN-EUG-CD (Eli* Code) 
For State Use Only. This field 'lndiites awbM&y of Federal F~nancial Partidpation in the 
pamafpte- 
G LAST-PAKT-BUiG (Med'ie Change Date) (MMpDyw) 
This field indicates the month and year in which Bvy4n activity most. tecently updated the 
MEDS record. Buy-In updates occur between the 19th and 25th of !he month 
2 MEDICARE PART A INFORMATION SEGMENT DEFlNmONS 
H CUR-BUYAN-STATUS (Cunent Bvy4n Status) 
I. DOME-DT (Dare of Medicare Entitlement) (MMm 
This fw id- the prospedive Medicare Entitlm Data. 
J. BUY-IN-EFF-DT (Effective Date) (MM/YY) - 
This field indies Bedive month and year of wnerd Pari A BuyJn Stahls 
K LAST-PARTACHG (Medicare Change Date) (MM/DD/YY) 
This Wd indimes the mMdh and year in which Part A Buy-In activay most recently updated 
the MEDS record. Bq-tn updates occur between the 19th and 25th of the month 
3. BENDEX TITLE I1 lNFORMATlON SEGMENT -DEFINCTIONS ' 
Claim Number or Social Seanity Number under whkb SSA benefi is filed. 
SECTION: 50773 MANUAL WR NO.: 1 19 DAfE: 8/ 1 1 /93 PAGE: 15F-21

[page 54]
MEDECAL ELIGIBILITY MANUAL - PROCEDURES SECTION 
M. INITIAL-ENTL-DATE (MM/YY) 
Jninial dare of entiti- to Tie I1 benefits 
Net amount previously certified by SSA for payment 
The net amount due the beneficiary under Tie I1 on the 3rd of !he next month after the 
BENDEX record is produced. MAMPLE: The BENDEX fae produced on 4/11/90 
amtahxl payment information iff the-6/3/90 SSA check. 
Morrey amourrts are diyed even if the be~fkiary was onty prwiousiy entitied or is in 
a nonpayment status (see letter Q for current BENDEX-PAY- STATUS). Zeros nomrally 
appearif.thebenefi.ciarywasdeniedbeneMs 
Indicates wbther the beneficiary is or was entitied to SSA Tdie I1 benefits under more than 
onectabnmlmber. 
1. Beneficiary is enMed on more than one daim number and all records are 
active . 
The BENDB( payment status code Sicaxes whether the beneM amwnt in 
CUR-BENEFK-AMT is payable ot the reason it is not payable; a CP in this field indicates 
that the benefit is payable. Other codes have the fdlowing meanings: 
A one or *podion code refieUing the SSA payment status for this ben&&uy. 
Adjustment 
AA withdrawal to spr'n paynms 
AC Correction in beneM me 
AD Ad- for dual-entitlement 
AE Withdrawnforreawnprdation 
AJ Worker's compensation offset 
AM Wirawat from Hionly ?ctah~; mon!Hy !mei%s being armled 
AR Wdhdrawalfrom SorTstatustophcein CP status 
SECTION: 50773 ~AL~NO~ 119 D*m8/11/93 PAGE: ISf0.22

[page 55]
- -- 
MEDkCAL EUGfBSLlTY MANUAL - PROCEDURES SECfiON 
AW Worker's compensation offset 
A% WdhdrawnfmmnonpaymenrsratusroplaceinCPstatus 
A- WaMtamiromCP~tobeplacedinnonpayme~~ 
AO.A&, Rate reduction is being figured 
A3As.M 
A6A7B 
49 . Miscdtaneoos adjustment not separately defined 
Abatement 
8 aaimant died prior to dement 
Current Pa- 
CP CwrerrtPaymeMStatus 
Defened: 
DP Receipt of public assistance 
Receipt of worker's cornpensation DW 
M Engaging in foreign work 
D2. BeneficiaryoverpaidbecauseafMnk 
D3 Arpcaiary's benefits witNtetd because of D2 st ah^^ for prhnary beneficiary 
D4 Failwe to have chid in care- 
D5 Auxiliary's benefirs wiWd because af a Dl status for primary beneficiary 
' 06 Deferredm recovercnmpaymentforteaswr not attribrda$le to ez@ngs 
D9 Miinewscniebment 
Denied: 
N Disaaaweddaim 
ND ~isabaay ctaim de;ded for nowmedici reason 
Detayed: 
K Advanced mng for deferred pa- 
1 AdMncedaing 
P Adjudication pending 
PB Benefits due but not paid 
m aaim~edfromde4yedstatus 
PF,PH,PJ, The beneficiary is to be placed in S staars upon final adjudim 
PKPLPM The lav order positiwt has the same meaning as the corresponding low 
PF+.PW,PO order of payment stam S. Upon final adjudication 
PI ,RP3 
P4,P5.P6. 
PI,e8,P9 
Suspended: 
SO Deoesmin;ationof~~ispendkrg' 
S1 Beneficiary engaged in work ouLside the US. 
S2 Beneficiary is working in the U.S. and expects to earn 
in excess of annual allowable tima 
S3 Arrrdiary'sbenefaswahheldbecauseofS2staarsof 
prtrrary beneficiary 
S4 Failure to have Chad in care 
S5 Auxikry's benefas withheld due to S1 status for prhnary 
beneficiary 
SECTION: 50773 MANUAL LEl7ER NO.: 119 DAZ' 8/11/93 PAGE: 1s-23

[page 56]
MEDECAL EUGIBILII"Y MANUAL - PROCEDURES SECTION 
Check was returned - conect address bag developed 
Died bemf&ky suspended due to refusal of 
vocatianal rehabaitation; imprisoned; ex!ended triai work period 
Suspended while payee is being detemrined 
Suspended for reason not separately defined 
Technical entitiefnefit only. Beneficiary is entiried on another daim 
Special age 72 beneficiary faas to meet residency requirement 
Special age 72 beneficiary is receiving a gavwnmerd pension 
Alien suspension 
BeneficiarV has been deported 
Beneficiary resides in a country to which checks cannot 
be sent 
Beneficiaty refused cash benefits (entitled to HISW 
only) 
Special age 72 beneficiary suspended due to receivirrg 
WE - 
Postseccmmystudentsummer~ 
kpnded because of worker's compensation 
Temwratedpriartoentitlement 
Mather, father termhated because beneficiary is 
entitied to dii widuw(er)'s benefits 
Di widow attahed age 62 and is not entitled as an aged widow 
Advmcd filed daim termbaed afwrmahrrity 
Tenninatioclafpostse##wfarystudent 
f-becauseof changeintypeof beneMorpostentittementadion 
ThecWnmasw'dhdrarm 
Convertedfrom~ibenefastoretirement 
-up#1reaching~65 
Benefirs are payable by some aSher agency 
Temhted due to death of tbe benekby 
I\lpdiary~dueto~ afthe primary 
Temrhr;ited due40 divorce marriage w mmmiage of the beneficiary 
Chjd altahed age 18 or 22 and is nos disabled; mother/falkr terminated 
becauseMchadatcainedage18 
'Beneficiaryentitiedto~benefit 
CMd is no longer a Went or dii; or the hist entitled cWd died or 
malTied 
Chad beneficiary was adopted; mo~her/father teminated as last chad 
adopted 
Rhay benefidary nd longer rlicslhled; M the hst disabled cMd no longer 
died 
T-ed for reason not sepamtely defined 
SECTION: 50773 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 119 DATE: 8/11/93 PAGE: 1s-24

[page 57]
MEDECAL ELIGIBILITY MANUAL - PROCWURES SECnON 
U Benediciary is entitied ordy to.HI or SMI 
w&hdrawal: 
W Wdhdrawal before entitlement 
Other Adjustment or ternination stalus: 
XO Cbim transferred to RRB 
XI Beneficiary di 
x5 Entitledtootherbenefus 
X7 WB/SMIB terminated 
X0 Payee is being developed 
X9 TetmhaW for reason not separately defined 
XD Wdhdrawn for adjustment 
XF Entitlwnent transfend to another PSC 
XK Benefidary d-ed 
XR wwrawn from SMIB 
R. HI-ENTL-DATE (MM/YY) 
Thisfieldwinsi.ic~lthe~dateoferditlemerrttoflospaallrtsraaraceW) Part AbeneMs 
S. HI-TERM-DATE (MMm 
This field MI show the most recent termirration date from HI benefits 
T. H-OPTION-CD 
This field will show the current HI sta!us code 
C No (cessation of ckbW) 
D No (denied) 
E Yes (arftMnatic entitlement no premium my) 
F No (terminated for irnmlid enrollment or enrdlmerd voided) 
G Yes (good cause) 
SECTION: 50773 MANUAL LRTER NO.: 119 DATE: 8/11/93 PAGE: 1s-25

[page 58]
MEDl-CAL .EUGIBILIlY MANUAL - PROCEDURES SECTION 
H No (not eligible for free heatth insurance benefits (Part A)) 
P Railroad jurisdiction 
R No (refused free Part A) 
S No (no longer under renal disease prwision) 
T No (terminated for non payment of premium) 
, W No (withdrawal from premium Part A) 
X No (Part ktembted because or-T* li temrirration (Section 2268)) 
Suppiemental insurance medical bendits (Part B) mchged 
Y Yes @remhrm is payable) 
The last dale, month, day and year, BENDEX updated bEDS. 
V. COMMUNICATTON-CODE MATCHED 
TtrisirrformationissuppliedbySSAto~~Stare~recotds~inresponse 
to State dbea input records being accxeteb ttvough the Buy-In System, and records 
ptwiwrsfy~ztsBENDEXwhkbareundergoingcttmge 
Nbha Numeric Codes derived by the BENDE% system to help the State interpret the data 
received 
WASbXX%b BENDEXexchangeistransfemdtoywragency:AgencyXXX -no 
lorrger receive BENDEX mcchange. See Cfb>O(Xbb below. 
MATCHEDb Cunent data was extracted from the Master Beneficiary Recad (MBR). 
. REPbPAYE fhisisafa~llyprocessedrec~dw'dh~~~ctedfromthebABR 
check is pqdde to someone other than the benekiary. 
FINbMMW The benehs for !his beneficiary termirrated for the month indiied. If 
aanrhrgsdatawasreqesed,PwiIl be- 
XEFbNUM Beneficiary is temimed on this reaxd; there is no aoss reference M3R 
or other erdiljernerd 
-- 
SECTIOEI: ST13 MANUAL NO.: 119 DATE: 8/11/93 PAGE: 15F-26

[page 59]
MEDKAL EUGIBIUrY MANUAL - PROCU)URES SECTlON 
LmbXRD Pertinentdatawasextractedonthisdaimrwmber. NoMBRttasbeen 
located howwer, for a crosdeence number. 
CFbXXXbb Record is in cod& with another agency, XXX This record represents the 
W arsomated data for the receiving agency. Since BENDM receives 
input from most States, as weil as other SSA systems, a priority of 
processing tras been established to follow in the event rmdtiple actions are 
received in a month for an individual- 
W. SMi-ENL DATE (MM/W) 
This W win shawthe aarent date of entitlement to Supp&~Ual Medical Insurance (SMI) 
PartBbenefas. 
WfieldwiU shcrwthe most recenttemrination date from SMI benefa. 
This field witl show the current SMI status code: 
No (diii ceased) 
No {denied) 
No @mhaW for imaGd enrdiment) 
Yes (good cause, enrdled in SMI) 
No (dual tedmidy enfitled benefidary nat &ed b SMI) 
Railmad hasjtaisdictionand cdiectsthepremhrm 
No (tefused) No (no longer under renal &isease provision) 
No (terminatedfor~Wofpremiums) 
No (witMm@ 
Yes (endled in SMI) 
Indicates the Mity making the Wemerrtal Medical lnwrance (Part 8) Premium pa- 
The fdlawing is an - d legends/codes: 
I. CML Civil service is biUed for SMI premium payments 
2 PRrrP - Private Third Party is billed for SMI ptemhrms 
3. RRB - RailroadBwrdhasJurisdich'on 
4. Sflf - The beneficiary is responsible for the SMI ptemhrm 
5. 01Oto650 - indicates the State is paying the Part B premhrm Caldomia's 
Stare Code for Pat B bmebaes . - is 050. 
SECTION: 50773 MANUAL W NO< llg DATE: 8/11/93 PAGE: 15F-27

[page 60]
.- . . -. 
MWW EUGIBlUTY MANUAL - PROCEDURES SECTION 
TABLE OF BENEnCtARY 1DENTlRCATION CODES (BICs) 
SA 81s TYPE OF BENEFlT 
A 
B 
B1 
B2 
83 
B4 
85 
06 
87 
B8 
89 
BA 
BD 
BG 
BH 
BI 
BK 
BL 
BN 
BP 
BQ 
BR 
BT 
BW 
BY 
Range Cl Rw C9 
Range CA Thru CK 
D 
Dl 
D2 
W 
04 
DS 
D6 
D7 
D8 
D9 
DA 
DC 
OD 
DG 
DH 
w 
PrSmaryCtaimant 
Aged We, age 62 or over (1st mM) 
Aged husband age 62 or over (1st dabnant) 
Ywrng wife, with a chad in her care (1st mnt) 
Ages-W-) 
Aged - (2nd -a) 
ywnswifem-1 
Divorced wife, age 62 or aver (1st dahmt) 
young (3rd -) 
Aged*(--) 
Divorced wife (2nd ctaimant) 
Aged wiFe (4th daimant) 
Aged wife (5th &m) 
Aged (3rd darn) 
AgedM(rn-1 
Aged - (5th -1 
Young wife (4th daimant) 
Youngwae(5thctaimant) 
Diiwife(3rddabant) 
Dii wife (4tJl daimard) 
Dii wife (5th daimant) 
Divorced husband (1st daimant) 
DivoreedW(2nddaim;lnt) 
youns -nd (2nd - 
Young husband (1st ckimant) 
chad~hdudesrrrinor,sCuderd,orcfii~ 
CWd (inciudes~.studentordiichad) 
Agedwidow,age60orover(lstdairrrartt) 
Aged widower, age 60 or over (1st dainmt) 
Aged widow (2nd claimant) 
Aged-m-1 
Wdaw (rwcwied after ainmerd of age 60) (1st ctabnard) 
Wdower (rermied after altaimm of age 60) (1st -1 
Sunrivingdhrcedwife,age6Doraver(1stdabnarrt) 
suwmgdii*(md~) 
Aged widow (3rd dairrrarrt) 
Rem;uried widow (2nd daimant) 
Remmied widow (3rd daimmd) 
Survbing d'i husband (1st daimant) 
Aged widow (m daimant) 
Aged widow (5th daimant) 
Aged widower (3rd daimard) 
Aged widower (4th daimant) 
SECTION: 50773 PAGE: 1s-28

[page 61]
MEDKAL ELIGIBILITY MANUAL 0, PROCEDURES SECTJON 
Aged widower (5th daimant) 
Remarried widow (4th dainrant) 
Surviving divorced husband (2nd claimant) 
Remanied widow (5th daiman!) 
RefmriedWawer(2nddaimant) 
Remanied wid- (3rd dam) 
Remarried widower (4th ctaimant) 
Slmhhgdivorced- (3rdcjaimant) 
Remaniedwidawer~-) 
Smiving divorced wife (3rd daimant) 
Smiving divorced wife (4th daimant) 
Sunivingdiihusband(4hcfainrard) 
Swviving divorced wife (5th daimarrt) 
Sravivingdihusband(5th-) 
Masher (widow) (1st claimant) 
Surviving divorced mather (1st chi) 
MotherWmm-) 
smivingdimother(2nddaimant) 
Father (widower) (1st ckhard) 
SLsvivingdiifather(widower) (la-) 
Fathw (widower) (2nd dahnard) 
- wm (3rd -1 
Mother m) (4th daimm) 
swvhg dii .fathet (wid-) (2nd daimant) 
Mather (widow) (5th ctaiman) 
Survivingdiimather(3rdctabrrar8) 
sulvmgdivoreedmoSher(4thctahnarQ) 
%wiving divwced mother (5th ctaimard) 
fathet (wid-) (3rd -1 
Father (wid- (4th dairrrar0) 
Father 0 (5th 
Survivingdivorcedfather(3rddabnant) 
~diifather~~ 
Swiving divwced father (5th dahnant) 
Father 
Mother 
Stepfather 
stepmottrer 
Adopting father 
Adopting- 
Second alleged father 
Second alleged mother 
Primary Prouty entitled to kahh insumnce benefits (HIB) (iess than 3 
quarters d coverage (Q-C-)) (General Fund) 
- - 
SECTION: 50773 WUAL lJ3TER NO.: 119 DATE: 8/11/93 PAGE: 1SF-29

[page 62]
MEDK=AL EUGIBfLlTY MANUAL - PROCEDURES SECTlON 
-A BIC lYPE OF BENEFIT 
Primary Prouty entitled to HI0 (over 2 Q.C.) (Retirement and Survivors 
insurance (RSI) TNst Fund) 
Rimary Prorrty not erdiried to HI6 (iess than 3 Q.C.) (Generat Fund) 
Prbrrary Routy not en&iUed to HIB (ow 2 Q.C.) (RSI Trust Fund) 
Prouty wife entitled to HIB (less than 3 Q.C.) (General Fund) (1st claimant) 
Prwty wiFe enhitled to HIB (over 2 Q.C.) (RSI Trust Fund) (1st dairrrant) 
Prouty wife not entiaed to HIB (less than 3 Q.C.) (General Fund) (1st 
-) 
Proirty wife nu? entitled to H1B (over2 Q.C.) (RSI TNst Fund) (1st daimant) 
Protdywife enbitied to HIB (less than 3 Q.C.) (General Fund) (2nd dainrard) 
Pr#by wife entitled to HB (over 2 QC) (RSI Ttust Fund) (2nd claim) 
R#rty wife not entitied to HIB fless ttian 3 Q.C.) (General Fund) (2nd 
- 
Rotdy wife not errbitled to HIB (over 2 Q.C.) (RSI TNst Fund) (2nd 
-1 
Rwty wife entltied to HIB (less than 3 Q.C) (General Fund) (3rd daimard) 
Rwty wife wtitled to HB (over 2 Q.C.) (RSI Ttust Fund) (3rd daii) 
Roray hik not enb'dfed to HIB (less than 3 Q.C.) (General Fund) (3rd 
-1 
R#by wife not entitled to HI5 (aver 2 Q.C.) (RSI Trust Fund) (3rd 
-) 
Pr0~tywiFeentiUedtoHlB(lessthan3Q-C.) (-Fund) (4thdam) 
ProutywifeerrtitledtoHIB (ow2Q-C.) (RSITnrst Fund) (4thdaimant) 
Prwty wife nat entitled to HIB (iess than 3 Q.C.) (Geneal fund) (4th 
daimara). 
PrwtywifenoterWedtoHIB (avef2Q.C.) (RSITnrst fund) (4thdaimard) 
RotdywifeerrfZtledto HB (lessthan3 Q.C.) (General FMd) (4th ctaimant) 
RorayWaeentDtledtoHiB(o~er2Q-C,(RSTTnstFund)(5th~) 
Proray wife not entitied to HIB (less than 3 Q.C..) (General Fund) (5th 
-1 
Prouty wife not entitled to HIB (over2 Q.C.) (RSI Tnrst Frmd) (5th dam) 
Uninsured beneficiary (not gualified for automatic HIB) 
Urrinsured beneficiary (qtraliSieb for arftomadic HB brrt requests anfy SMIB) 
Fdlyirrsuredbenefici;rrieswhotraveelected~~to 
MB (ustgay but not afways dong with SMIB) 
Uninswedbeneficimywrenddbease~ciafyonfy 
Deemedirrsned(hospaalhrsuance~) 
Medicare QualiKed Government Employmen! (MOGE) prhnary benefidary 
MQGE aged spouse (1st dainr;rrrt) 
MQGE childhood dbbifii benefits (CDB) (1st daimant) 
MQGE aged widaw(er) (1st daimard) . 
MQGE ywnd widow(er) (1st daimant) 
parent (-1 
aged w=e (2nd -1 
MOGE aged spouse (3rd d;iimard) 
SECTION: 54173 LE'rER NO-: 119 DATE: 8/11/93 PAGE: 15F-30

[page 63]
MEDI-CAL ELlGlBIUTY MANUAL - PROCEDURES SECTION 
TJ 
fK 
n 
N 
M 
TP 
TQ 
fR 
TS 
TT 
TU 
N 
TW 
TX 
M 
R 
Range 
W 
w 
W2 
W3 
w4 
W5 
W6 
W7 
W8 
W9 
WB 
wc 
WF 
WG 
WJ 
WR 
wr 
MCIGE aged spouse (4th claimant) 
MQGE aged spouse (5th -1 
MQGE aged wfdow(er) (2nd daimant) 
MQGE aged widw(er) (3rd dahant) 
MQGE aged widaur(er) (4th dabnant) 
MQGE aged widw(er) (5th dahnard) 
MQGE m (f-e) 
MQGE young widow(erj (2nd daimant) 
. MQGE young widow(er) (3rd chimant) 
MQGE young widow(er) (4th daimant) 
MQGE young widow(@ (5th cfaimard) . 
MQGE died widow(@ (5th daimant) 
MQGE disabled widow(er) (1 st daimard) . 
MUGE 6ied widow(er) (2nd daimant) 
MQGE disabled widow@) (3rd dabrtard) 
MQGE disabled widow(er) (4th da'anant) 
T2 M T9 MQGE (CDB) (2nd to 9th dairrtarrt) 
Disabled widow, age 50 or over (1st claimant) 
DbbM widower, age 50 or over (1st daimant) 
Disabted widow (2nd daimant) 
Disabled widow(er) (2nd ctaimant) 
Di widow (3rd dahant) 
Disabled widower (3rd daimant) 
Disabled survivingdivorcedwife (1st dahmt) 
Disabled smvivhg divorced wife (2nd daimard) 
Disabled surviving divorced wiFe (3rd daim-arrt) 
Oisabied widow (4th dabnant) 
Disabled widawer (4th ctaimant) 
Disabledswvivingdivorcedwife(9th~) 
Disabled widow (5th dabnant) 
Dhbiedwidawer(5thdaimard) 
Disabled surviving di (5thdaimant) 
Disabledsurv'rvingdivorcedhUsband(1stdaimard) 
Died surviving di husband (2nd -) 
127 
SECTION: 501;13 MANUAL LETTER NO.: DATE: FEB 0 1 1994 PAGE: 15F-31

[page 64]
MEDK=AL EUGIBIIJTY MANUAL - PROCEDURES SECTION 
TABLE OF RAILROAD RETIREMENT BOARD PREFIXES AND EQUIVALENT 
SSA BENEnClARV iDUJflRCATlON CODES (BICs) 
RRB Claim Prefix SSA Biq Tme RRB Beneficiaw 
Rehiement-empioyee or annuitant 
RR pensioner (age or diity) 
Spouse of RR employee or annuitant 
(husband or -1 
Spouse af RR pensioner 
Chad of RR employee 
ChPdafRRannuitant 
Disabled adott child of RR annuitant 
Wdworwidowerofan RR employee 
Wdow or widower of an RR anntriEard 
Wdoworwidowerofan RR pensioner 
Wdow of employee with a child in her care 
WdwodannuaantwithacMdtnhercare 
WidowafpendonerwithacMdinhercare 
-afRF?empioyee 
ParentofRF?~ 
Parent of RF? pensioner 
swivorjoirrt~(anannuitardwho 
has taken a reduced amMad to 
guarantee payment to a surviving 
spouse) 
SEmON: 50773 MANUAL LmlER NO: 
127 DATE: 0 1 1394 ¶SF-32

[page 65]
MEDI-CAL EUGIBIUTY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
15H-HEALTH INSURANCE PREMIUM PAYMENT PROGRAM 
This section provides background information and procedures pertaining to the Health Insurance Premium 
Payment (HIPP) and Employer Group Heatth Pian (EGHP) Programs. 
The HlPP Program Welfare and Institutions Code, Section 14124.91) was established by 
enacttnent of AssemMy Bin 3328 Nargolin, Chapter 940, Statutes of 1986). This law authorizes 
the Department of Heatth Services (DHS), whenever it is cost effective, to pay health coverage 
premiums on behalf of Medi-Cal beneficiaries. Cost effectiveness is defined by Section 50778, 
California Code of Regulations (CCR) as when the annual cost of the premium is less than half the 
estimated cost of Medi-Cal benefits. The primary objective of the Program is to continue a 
higkcost Medil beneficiary's other health coverage by paying medical coverage premiums 'for 
the beneficiary. Paying premiums for high-cost medical results in a reduction of Medi-Cal costs. 
The EGHP Program (Section 4402, Omnibus Budget Reconciliition Act of 1990 (OBRA '90)) 
mandates (effective January 1, 1991 1, that all states, when it is cost effective, pay the heatth 
insurance premiums, deductible., co-payment and other cost-sharing obligations for Medi-Cal 
recipients eligible for enrollment in an employer group health plan. The State may also pay the 
premiums (but not other costsharing obligations) for a non-Mediil eligible if the Medi-Cal 
eligible's enrollment in the health plan is dependent on the non-Medi-(=a1 eligible's enrollment. In 
addition, OBRA '90 mandates that when it is cost effective, enrollment in an employer or group 
health plan is a condition of Medicaid eligibility except for an individual (such as a child) who is 
unable to enroll on hislher own behalf. 
To participate in the Hiff and EGHP Programs, applicants will have to prove that their monthly 
medical costs are at least twice as much as the monthly insurance premiums. 
a. The applicant must currently be on Medi-Cal. 
b. The MediiCal Share of Cost, if any, must be $200 ndess. 
c. There is a expensive medical condition. The average monthly savings to Medi-Cat from 
the heah insurance must be a least twice the monthly insurance premiums. The monthly 
Share of Cost will be subbacted from the monthly health care costs to determine if paying 
the premiums is cost effective. 
d. There is a current health insurance policy, COBRA continuation policy, or a COBRA 
conversion policy in effect, or an employer group health plan for which enrollment 
application has not been made, but which is available to the beneficiary. 
e. The application must be completed and returned in tiine for the State to process the 
application and pay the premium. 
f. The heatth insurance policy must cover the high cost medical condition. 
SECTION NO.: 50778 MANUAL LRTER NO.: 155 DATE: 1-16-96 15H-1

[page 66]
MEDI-CAL ELlGlBlLlTY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
9- The poky must not be issued through the Cariornia Major Risk Medical Insurance Board 
(MRMIB). 
h. There is no enrdlment in a MecTi-Cal related prepaid health plan, County HeaJth Initiative, 
Geographic Managed Care, or the County Medical Services Program (CMSP). 
I. The premiums are not the responsibiiity of an absent parent. 
In order tn identify Medi-Cal ;rppiiFes who are potentially eligible for the HIPPEGHP 
Program, county workers must: 
LssueaHeaithtnsurance- a. CDHS 61 55-Rea 10190) form to the beneficiary 
to complete during the apprion and redeterminaion processes when the 
-ficiary indicates: 1) that heishe or a family member is employed and that 
~~ bakh brsrance is a~aable but has nut been applied for, 2) that helshe 
or a family member maend$ has individual, group or employer-related heatth insurance 
and has a high cost medical coruiiion. 
(1) If the a~pticant/beneficiav currendy has hem insurance (private or employer 
dated) AND a high cost medical condition. 
(a) Complete the DHS 6155. Indicate the illness and Ute name of the 
applicantlbeneficiary with the illness in the 89 area of the form. In the 
upper right had corner of the DtlS 6155 form, write the notation 'HIPP'. 
(2) H the applicantlbeneficiary is not covered by a health pkn, but has a high cost 
medical condiion, AND health -mnce is available through an empioyer (or 
family member's employer), but the applicanvbeneficiary has not ertro1led: 
(a) Complete the DHS 6155. Indicate the illness, and the name of the 
applicam/beneficiary with the iUness in the #9 area of the form. Also, 
indicate the m(s) and Social Security Number(s) of beneficiaries who 
could be enrolled, the nameiaddress of .the employer, the name of the 
avaihble heatth inarrance, and the name and Social Security Number of 
the employee who has the insurance avaiible to himfher. Check the #6 
box 'Medical coverage available through employer, but has not been 
appIied for". In the upper rigtrt hand comer of the DHS 61 55 form, write 
the notation 'EGHP REFERRAL ONLY. This indicates that the 
applicant(s)/beneficary(s) listed do not currentty have the insurance and 
you are completing an EGHP refenal so that DHS can determine if it 
would be cost effect& .to prrdrase the employer-related health insurance 
for the appficam/beneficiary with a high cost medical condition. 
SECTION NO.: 50778 MANUAL LRTER NO.: 155 DATE: 1-16-96 15H-2

[page 67]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
(3) If insurance is available through an employer (or family member's employer). but has 
not been enrolled in and no one in the case has a high cost medical condition. 
(a) Complete the DHS 6155. Indicate the name(s) and Social Security Number(s) 
of beneficiaries who could be enrolled. the nameladdress of the employer. the 
name of the available health insurance, and the name and Social Security 
Number of the employee who has the insurance available to himlher. Check 
the #6 box 'Medical coverage available through employer, but has not been 
applied for." In the upper right hand corner of the DHS 6155 form, write the 
notation 'EGHP REFERRAL ONLY". This indicates that the 
applicant(s)/beneficiary(s) listed do not currently have the insurance and you are 
completing an EGHP referral so that DHS can determine if it would be cost 
effective to purchase the employer-related health insurance. 
b. Assure that critical segments of the DHS 6155 (applicantlbeneficiary name, Medi-Cal 
identification number. applicanubeneficiary telephone number, insurance carrier name. 
unionlemployer name and telephone number) are complete, accurate, and readable. 
SPECIAL NOTE: If the beneficiary cannot be given the form in person and the beneficiary 
notifies the CWD that hislher health insurance has or is about to terminate. or the beneficiaw 
has not applied for employer-related health insurance, the Eligibility Worker (EW) must send 
the Health lnsurance Questionnaire (DHS 61 55) form to the beneficiary to complete, sign, and 
a 
date. Instructions must be given to the beneficiary to mail the form to the DHS. 
c. Advise the applicantlbeneficiary that providing the health insurance information will not 
interfere with Medi-Cal Eliaibilitv. but if ~avment for the aroup or emplover-related health 
insurance plan is approved by the ~e~artment. enrollm&t in'the heaith plan is mandatory. 
Disenrollment from the plan bv the appltcan~beneficiaw. without the approval of 
Department of Health services, i; cause for discontinuance-of Medi-Cal eligit;ility. 
d. Advise the applicantlbeneficiarv that if health insurance coveraae is available from anv . . " 
~~~~ 
source. (i.e.. employer. union), at no cost to the beneficiary. the applicantlbeneficialy& 
enroll. If the applicantlbeneficialy fails to cooperate by not enrolling in the plan. the county 
worker must deny or discontinue Medi-Cal eligibility. 
e. Retain a copy of the Health Insurance Questionnaire (DHS 6155) in the case file. 
. 
f. Mail the completed Health Questionnaire (DHS 6155) within five (5) days to the' 
Department of Health Services. Send the HlPP or EGHP DHS 6155 application form in a 
separate envelope from all other DHS 6155 forms to: 
Department of Health Services 
MediGal Third Party Liability Branch 
HIPP Unit' 
MS 4719 
P.O. Box 997422 
Sacramento, CA 95899-7422 
SECTION NO.: 50778 MANUAL LElTER NO.: 298 DATE: 10/04/05 15H-3

[page 68]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
g. Notify the Department immediately by calling (866) 298-8443 if the Countydetermines 
lhat a beneficiary has withdrawn from enrollment in a plan for which DHS pays 
I 
premiums under HIPP or EGHP. The Department will direct the County by leierb 
discontinue Medi-Cal eligibility upon verification.of the beneficiary's disenrollment from 
the plan. The County must noti$ the beneficiary that eligibility has been withdrawn in 
accordance with Section 50179(c)(7). Title 22. CCR. when instructed by the 
Department to discontinue Medi-Cal eligibility. 
h. Review and recompute the beneficiary's Share of Cost as necessary in accordance 
with Articles 12A and 128 (Share of Cost) of the procedures portion of the Medi-Cal 
Eligibility Manual. 
4. Department of Health Services Responsibilities 
Utilizing the HlPPlEGHP qualifying criteria the Department shall: 
a. Review the Health Insurance Questionnaire (DHS 6155), contadapplicantlbeneficiary 
for additional documentation and approve the application when it is determined to be 
cost effective for the State to pay the health insurance premiums. 
b. Notify the County and the beneficiary of State's intent to approve andlor terminate 
payment of the health insurance coverage. 
SECTION NO.: 50778 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 298 DATE: 10/04/05 15H4