[page 1]
MEDI-CAL ELlGlBlLlN PROCEDURES MANUAL 
Article 8 -- RESPONSIBLE RElATlVES AND UNIT DETERMINATION 
8A -- MFBU DETERMINATIONS 
1. MFBU CHART 
8B - MFBU DETERMINATION, FAMILY MEMBER IN LONG-TERM CARE (LTC) OR 
BOARD AND CARE (BBC) 
8C - PERSONS UNDER AGE 21 LIVING AWAY FROM PARENT'S HOME 
8D - MFBU DETERMINATION - CARETAKER RELATIVE 
8E - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 
8F - SNEEDE V. KIZER 
1. Overview 
2. Effective Date 
3. Linkage to the Medi-Cal Program 
4. Responsible Relative Determination 
5. Mini-Budget Units 
6. Income and Property Allocations 
7. Maintenance Need and Property Limits 
8. Property Determination 
9. Income Determination 
10. Changes in MFBU Rules for Certain Sneede and Non-Sneede Cases 
1 1. Federal Poverty Level Programs 
12. Lack of Cooperation or Loss of Contact 
13. Impact on Other Lawsuits/Programs 
14. Examples 
A. Property 
1. Stepparent Household Wrth Separate 8 Mutual Children 
MANUAL LETTER NO.: 219 DATE: MARCH 1,2000 PAGE: ARTICLE 8, TGI

[page 2]
-- 
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
2. Children W~th Property 
3. Unmarried Couple With Separate and Mutual Children 
B. Property and Income 
4. Unmarried Couple With Mutual Children 
C. Income 
5. Spouses and Mutual Child W~th Income 
6. Stepparent Household With Mutual and Separate Children 
7. Child With Income 
8. Stepparent Household With In-Kind Income 
9. Stepparent Household and the Percent Programs 
10. Stepparent Household When Only the Separate Child(ren) 
of One Parent Wishes Medi-Cal 
11. Stepparent Household - Spouse in LTCIB&C 
12. Excluded Child Case - Parents Cooperate 
13. Excluded Child Case - Parents Refuse to Cooperate 
14. Stepparent Household With Pregnant Minor and Her 
Boyfriend 
15. Stepparent Household With Minor Mother, Minor Mother's 
Baby, and Minor Mother's Boyfriend 
16. Married Couple With Mutual Children; Unmarried Pregnant 
Minor and Father of the Unborn, Filing for Minor Consent 
17. PAlOther PA Person in Household 
15. Charts and Forms 
8G - MFBU DETERMINATIONS FOR THE SECTION 1931(b) PROGRAM 
1. Background 
2. MFBU Rules 
3. Sneede Requirements 
4. Examples 
5. Charts and Forms 
-- 
MANUAL LEVER NO.: 219 DATE: MARCH 1,2000 PAGE: ARTICLE 8, TC-2

[page 3]
---- ------------------------- ---- ------- 
HEDI-CB1,. ELIGIBf LfTY MANUAL 
8A -- HFBU Determinations 
-._.._- -------rr.Ir-------.I.-rrrr------ ----- -.I--- 
- LETTER NO. 47 (2110181) 
---- ------------ -------------- ------- ---, 
1. MFBU CHART 
lhk~btoktrrtdinamiunctimwithScaion 50372 (aI(4). 
A =&k = ~cd~~rrnf 
0 = hk = Child requesting minor amem aty 
-~.or~au* = Crmhrrebthe 
=%Id < ) = Miiblenrmhrof MFW 
FAMlLY MEMBERS LIVING 
IN WE HOME 
(NOT PA OR OWER PA) . 
1 
A 
2 
m 
MFBU 
1 - 
A 
2 
a-0 
3 
8 
3 
1 
4 4 
8 
H dritdrm I 
54381 .

[page 4]
-I-CAL ELIGIBILITY ---------------------- ,--,.--.- ----------- 
---------. ---- -------.--- ----------- -0- 
MANUAL NO* 47 (2/10/81) 8A-2 
----- ----------------------- * ------------ --

[page 5]
mI-C+ ELIGIBILITY WWAL 
9a Two MFBUs 
AND 
* If the mutual children of the unmarried parent are excluded in accordance 
uith Section 50381, See 4 and 5 to determine status of secd unmarried 
parent and 8 to determine status of unmarried minor parent. 
If unmarried minor parent wts minor consent sewices only, include as a 
eligible person in HFBU with histher child. 
-- ------..-- - .C- ------ 
l4ANU.L LflTTEB NO. 17 (2/10/81) BA-3

[page 6]
and any 
I n 
i COmbiMtion 
all other famity 
0 -mb-PAor 
ahtr PA 
ALL [7 
-.---------------.--------------------- 
nrUJUAL NO. 47 (2110181) 8~4 
-..)-.------------.-------------------------

[page 7]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES NIAflUAL 
88 - Medi-Cal Family Budget Unit (MFBU) Determination, Family Member 
In Long-Tern Care (LTC) Facility or Board and Care (B8C) 
LTC facility is defined as a medical institution or nursing facility. See All County Welfare Directors 
Letter (ACWDL) No. 9001, Section 50056.5.) 
1. SPOUSAL IMPOVERlSHMENT CASES 
The following information is to be used in conjunction with ACWDL 91-84. 
THE SPOUSAL IMPOVERlSHMENT PROVISIONS APPLY WHENEVER INOMDUALS WHO ARE 
MARRIED TO ONE ANOTHER WHERE LEGALLY SFPARATED FOR WARS) 'I1EET 
FOLLOWlNG DEFlNmONS. Married individuals are cansidered to be spom for spousal 
impoverishment purposes until the marriage is diilved or annulled If the following definitions of 
an Institutionalized Spouse and Community Spouse do not apply, then Section I1 shall apply. 
onaiized and Communitv Smuses (whether or not there are children resklina wlth thg 
Communh Sr)ousel shall be in semmte MFBUs and the smusal immverishment amvisions 
contained in ACWDL 90-01 shall a~~hr on the first of the month of adm'ksion to a medical 
institution or nursina facilii. 
An lnstitutionalhed Spouse Is: 
admitted to a medical institution or a nursing faBi on or after Septwnber 30. 4989; 
expected to remain an inpatient (see NO= below) for a continuous period of 3C consecutive 
days or more (a wntinuous period ends when me institutionalized spouse has not received 
inpatient care in a medical institution or nursing facifity for a full calendar month); 
married to a community spouse; and 
not Aid to Families with Dependent Children (AFDC) cash or AFDC-MN immediately prior 
to admission. 
NOTE: Unless the applicant has been an inpatient for 30 days or more, the expectation to remain 
for 30 days or more must be verified by a statement (signed and dated) from the institutionalized 
spouse's physician. 
A Community Spouse is: 
married to an Institutionaleed Spouse, and 
is not an inpatient in a medical institution or nursing faciSi. 
NOTE: A Community Spouse may be a resident in a board and care facility, assisted living faciSi 
or other nonmedical living arrangement 
SECT~ON NO.: 5 c 3 7 7 ~NUAL LEER NO.: il8 9 DATE: OCT 2 9 &I 8bj

[page 8]
MEDI-CAL ELlGlBILrrY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
The following charts DO NOT apply if the spouses meet the criteria in 
Section I beginning on 8B-1. 
11. NONSPOUSAL IMPOVERISHMENT FOR SPOUSES WHO ARE AGED, BLIND, AND 
DISABLED (ABD), MEDICALLY INDIGENT(M1) AND AFDC 
NOTE: Where the chart .hditcates that couples are m separaie MFBUs. the separation occurs in the 
month following the month that the first spouse was admitted to the LTC facw or BaC 
faciii. 
RULE 1: WHERE ONE OR BOTH SPOUSES ARE ABD, THEN SEPARATE -Us 
Individuals who are married to each other but who are separatedbr who have experienced 
a break in marital. ties aie in separate MFBUs beginning with the month of the -on or 
break 
pivision of communitv ~ro~ertv aoelies when in sewrate MFBUs. Once couoles are 
placed into semrate MFBUs. the cou~ie is nwer recombined unless thev rrve Wether 
in the home aaain for a full calendar month for ~ro~ertv ~umases. For income - 
pumases. the share of cost calculations mav differ for the month of return to the 
home. 
RULE 2: ALl OTHER (AFDC OR Mi) SPOUSES ARE IN THE SAME MFBU 
SECTION NO.: 5 0 3 j 7 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 1 8 8 DATE: .a 2 s 8B-2

[page 9]
MEDI-CAL ELiGIBlLlTY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
-- - 
NONSPOUSAL lMPOVERlSHMENT ABD, Mi, AFDC SPOUSES (cont) 
One or Both Spouses in LTC Facility or B8C. An LTC facility is defined as a medical institution or 
nursing facility (see ACWDL 90-01, Section 50056.5). 
-- 
MENT CASES 
No temporary absence therefore not AFDC, must be ABD or MI. 
Ill. CHILD(REN) IN LTC OR B&C 
- 
SECTION NO.: 5 0 3 7 7 MANUAL LElTER NO.: 1 8 0 - D"A~E.. OCf 9 bl 8B-3

[page 10]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBIL~ PROCEDURES MANUAL 
When one or more children are in an LTC facility or B8C the following chart applies. An LfC 
facility is defined as a medical institution or nursing facility (see ACWDL 904, Section 
5OOS6.5.) 
NOTES: 
1. Where the chart indicates that the child is in the 'Same MFBU" this means that the child is in the 
same MFBU with the parent in the home when at least one of the parents is in the home. 
- 2. An unborn is considered to be iiiing with the parent imrnediatety preceding entry. 
SECTION NO.: 5 0 3 7 7 MANUAL NO.: 1 8 9

[page 11]
8C--PERSONS UNDER AGE 21 LIVING AWAY FROM THE PARENT'S HOME 
Contact With 
Parent' 
1. Any living 
situation, claimed 
as tax dependent 
by parent. 
2, Independent 
living situation. '9 
3. Living on the 
parent's property in 
a building that 
would be 
considered the 
parent's "other real 
property" for 
Medi-Cal purposes. 
4. Attending 
school away from 
parent's home. '9 
Whose Income and 
Property is Counted 
Living Situation Person's Characteristics 
Yes 
No 
No 
YesINo 
YesINo 
.-No 
Y$ 
-. 
Yes 
ye& 
Yes 
No 
A. 18-to-21 -year-old. *9 
B. Under 18. 
A. 18-21-year-old. 
B. 14-to-18-year-old handling all 
of hislher own financial affairs. 
C. 14-to-18-year-old with a 
parent, caretaker relative, or 
legal guardian handling some or 
all of hislher financial affairs. 
D. Under 14. 
A. 18-to-21-year-old ib 
receiving any financial support 
from parents. '9 
B. 18-to-21 -year-old receiving 
financial support~om parents. '9 
C. 14-to-18-year-old. 
D. Under 14. 
A. 18-to-21 -year-old who always 
returns home when not in school 
or considers the parent's home 
hislher home:3 
B. 18-to-21-year-old who 
handles hislher own financial 
affairs and considers 
himselflherself to be living on 
hislher own and returns home 
only for visits. '3 
X 
Who Completes 
Statement of Facts 
Status 
Adult 
Parents. 
Child 
Parent's, 18-to-21 -year-old's, 
other MFBU member's. 
18-to-21-year-old's. 
14-to-1 8-year-old's.'2 
14-to-18-year-old's. '2 
Under 14-year-old's. 
18-to-21-year-old's. 
Parent's', 18-to-21 -year-old's, 
other MFBU member's. 
Parent's, 14-to-18-year-old's, 
other MFBU member's. 
Parent's, under 14-year- 
old's, other MFBU member's. 
Parent's, 18-to-21 -year-old's. 
other MFBU member's. 
18-to-21-year-old's. 
Determine in accordance w~th 2 through 5, 
below. 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
x 
x 
x -' 
X 
18-to-21-year-old. 
14-to-1 8-year-old. 
Parent, caretaker relative, 
or guardian. If they will 
not and public agency 
also refuses, 14-to-1 8- 
year-old may complete. 
Parent, caretaker relative, 
or legal guardian. If they 
will not and public agency 
also refuses, child may 
lot," 
18-to-21-year-old. 
Parent. 
Parent. 
:Parent. 
Parent. 
18-to-21-year-old.

[page 12]
8C--PERSONS UNDER AGE 21 LIVING AWAY FROM THE PARENT'S HOME 
Contact With 
Parent' 
ii z 
3 . . 
n 3 
JJ 
2 
I3-l 
'3 2 
, z 
$ C 
F1 
r rn 
=I m 
. 
Z 
: P . . 
td 
4 
CY 
u 
I% 
!?' 
0 
F- 
'1 
h3 
'4 
\ 
0 
U 
'00 
? I h) 
6 1 ~du~t Child 
: j 
-r 
Whose Income and 
Property is Counted 
E. Aid Code 45 or in foster care 
prior to LTC status, not disabled. 
Who Completes 
Statement of Facts 
Status Living Situation 
Yes 
Yes 
No 
. . .. 
K 
No ::; 
Yes 
P- 
Yes 
No 
Person or agency 
responsible for child. 
Person's Characteristics 
Parent's, 14-to-1 8-year-old's, 
other MFBU member's. 
Parent's, under 14-year- 
old's, other MFBU member's. 
NIA--assumption that public 
agency has made needy 
determination (form MC 250). 
18-to-21 -year-old's. 
Disabled child's. 
Parent's, LTC child's, other 
MFBU member's. 
Child's:a 
4. Attending 
school away from 
parent's home. 
(Cont.) 
5. Out-of-home 
care (nonmedical) 
public agency 
assuming financial 
responsibility in 
whole or part (Aid 
Code 45) '4,5 
6. Out-of-home 
care (non-medical) 
including custodial 
care in the state 
hospital). 
7. Long-term care 
(LTC) 
I 
C. 14-to-18-year-old handling all 
hisiher own financial affairs. 
D. 14-to-l&year-old with parent 
handling hislher financial affairs. 
E. Under 14. 
A. Under 21. 
A. 18-to-21-year-old. 
B. Under 18. 3;L 
A. Disabled, 18-to-21-year-old. 
[ 
13. Disabled, under 18. 
C. Living with parents prior to 
LTC status, not disabled. *7 
D. Independent living, attending 
school, out-of-home care prior to 
LTC status, not disabled. 
Determine as in 4. A and B. 
X 
X 
X 
Parent. 
Parent. 
Public agency assuming 
financial responsibility. 
Determine in accordance with 1 or 2, above. 
Determine in accordance with 2, above. 
X 
Determine as in 1 through 4, above. 
X 
-X 
18-to-21-year-old. 
Parent or person or 
agency responsible for 
child. '6 , . 
Tv -* 
Parent.

[page 15]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
8D--MFBU DETERMINATIONS-CARETAKER RELATIVES 
RELATIONSHIP REQUIREMENTS 
Relationship requirements are based on the Department of Social Services CalWORKs 
program (formerly Aid to Families with Dependent Children) Manual Section 82-808. 
Relationship of a Caretaker The caretaker relative shall be related to the 
applicant/eligible child as specified below. 
Degree of Relatedness 
Biological Relatives 
Step Relatives 
Spouses of Relatives 
Adoptive Relatives 
The caretaker relative may be any relation by 
blood, marriage or adoption who is within the fifth 
degree of kinship to the dependent child. 
The acceptable caretaker relative shall be a 
parent (1 degree), grandparent (2"d degree), 
sibling (2nd degree), great-grandparent (3rd 
degree), uncle or aunt (3rd degree), nephew or 
niece (3d degree), a great-great grandparent (4" 
degree), a reat-uncle or aunt (4" degree), first W cousin (4 degree), a great-great-great 
grandparent (5" degree), a great-great uncle or 
aunt (5" degree), or a first cousin once removed 
(5" degree). 
A stepfather, stepmother, stepbrother or 
stepsister, or 
A spouse of any person named above even after 
the marriage has been terminated by death or 
dissolution, or 
A person who legally adopts the child or that 
person's relatives, as specified. See Section 
50068. 
The caretaker relative shall be any of the relatives 
specified above when a child has been 
relinquished, adopted, or parental rights are 
terminated. 
SECTION: 50373 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 232 DATE: 11/3/00 PAGE: 8D-1

[page 16]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
Example A: If A or B are first cousins, B's children are first cousins once removed to A 
and A's children are first cousins once removed to B. A's children and B's 
children are second cousins. 
I 
Example B: A step-grandparent is not a caretaker relative, however helshe may be a 
caretaker if shelhe is a spouse of a grandparent. 
Example C: An ex-wife of a spouse who had no children between them may be a 
caretaker to the children of her ex-husband's second wife as an ex-spouse, 
but not as a stepparent. 
Example D: If an adopted child returns to live with a biological parent, the biological 
parent may choose to be linked as a caretaker relative even though the 
adoptive parent may still have legal responsibility. 
Evidence includes: 
I + Adoption papers or records 
+ Baptismal records of birth and 
parentage 
+ Birth certificate 
+ Bureau of Vital Statistics or local 
government 
+ Records of birth and parentage 
+ Census records 
+ Church records, (including a 
statement from priest, minister, etc.) 
of parentage or relationship. 
+ Court records of parentage 
+ Court support records 
+ Day care center records 
+ Divorce papers 
Family Bible 
Hospital or public health records of 
birth and parentage 
Indian census records 
Insurance policy 
Juvenile court records 
Marriage licenses/records 
Outpatient care records from a 
hospital, clinic, or physician 
Paternity records maintained by a 
Child Support Agency 
School records 
Voluntary social service agency 
records 
If there is no evidence, a sworn statement signed by the caretaker is acceptable when 
evidence is not conflicting and attempts to obtain verification are documented in the case 
record. 
DETERMINING CARE AND CONTROL 
The following factors may be considered when determining whether the caretaker has care 
and control when the child is living in the home with a caretaker. I 
SECTION: 50373 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 2-32 DATE: 11 /3/00 PAGE: 8D-2

[page 17]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
+ Deciding where the child attends school or child care. 
+ Dealing with the school on educational decisions and problems. 
+ Controlling participation in extracurricular and recreational activities. 
+ Arranging medical and dental care services. 
+ Claiming the child as a tax dependent. 
+ Purchasing and maintaining the child's clothing. 
NON-PARENT CARETAKER RELATIVE PROGRAM RULES 
A caretaker relative is not required to be in the MFBU if they are not requesting benefits 
for themselves. 
A caretaker relative is linked to the related child because the parent is absent from the 
home or for Section 1931 (b) purposes only, the parent lives in the home, but has no 
care and control. 
Only siblings and half-siblings are in the same MFBU. 
Only one caretaker relative may be linked to a child. If there is more than one child in 
the household and they are not siblings, each caretaker may be linked to a different 
child. The caretakers would be in separate budget units with their related child. 
If the caretaker relative is pregnant, aged, blind, or disabled etc., helshe need not be 
included with the related child; however, helshe must be linked to a deprived child to 
be eligible for the Section 1931 (b) program. 
A caretaker relative with hislher own deprived child and a related child may choose to 
be linked to either hislher own child or the related child. 
If an MFBU which contains a caretaker relative and related children has excess 
property or a share of cost, follow existing SneedeIGamma procedures in Article 8F. 
Caretaker relatives are not responsible for their related children and do not allocate to 
them. The related children receive a full income limit or maintenance need amount 
rather than a prorated amount. 
A caretaker relative who is eligible for Section 1931 (b) with a related child is not in the 
MFBU with other household members who are not eligible for Section 1931 (b) unless 
the caretaker's spouse, other parent, or children are being evaluated for the Percent 
programs. 
A caretaker relative who is not eligible for Section 1931(b) and is eligible for the 
Medically Needy (MN) program with a related child is also in the MFBU as an ineligible 
member with an MN spouse or other MN parent and would be an ineligible member of 
SECTION: 50373 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 247 DATE~/~~/~I PAGE: 8D-3

[page 18]
. 
MEDI-CAL ELlGlBlLlN PROCEDURES MANUAL 
the MI budget if helshe has hislher own MI children. 
In households where there is an MFBU which contains a caretaker relative and related 
children and the spouse or children of the caretaker either do not wish Medi-Cal or 
receive public assistance (PA) or other PA and do not appear in any MFBU, no income 
or property allocation is made to either the spouse or the caretaker's own children by 
the caretaker or vice versa. If the spouses have joint checking accounts or savings, 
assume "/z is community property unless it is separate. 
If the caretaker relative is in two MFBUs, consider the caretaker relative's full income 
in both and allow hislher medical expenses to be used to meet the share of cost in both 
MFBUs as specified in Section 50379. 
Note: See the Procedures 8F and 5K for more information. See Procedures Manual 8G 
for Section 1931 (b) MFBU and income rules. 
MEDI-CAL FAMILY BUDGET UNIT SCENARIOS 
Family Members Living in the Home MFBU Composition 
Who are not PA or Other PA 
EXAMPLE 1 
Grandmother requests Medi-Cal for herself and her grandchildren (siblings or half siblings). 
The grandfather and their children also live in the home. The grandfather has no linkage 
and does not wish Medi-Cal nor do their own children. 
Household 
Caretaker grandmother; related children; 
caretaker's spouse; their own children. . 
I MFBU for either Section 193 1 (b) or MN 
I I 
a) Caretaker; related children 
EXAMPLE 2 
Grandmother requests Medi-Cal for herself, her grandchildren (siblings or half siblings), her 
spouse, and their own children, none of whom are the grandchildren's parent(s). The 
grandfather and their children live in the home. The grandfather has no linkage. The 
grandmother has no basis for linkage except as a non-parent caretaker relative to her 
grandchildren. 
The caretaker and her related children are eligible for Section 1931 (b). The caretaker's 
spouse has no linkage and their own children are not deprived. The mutual children should 
be evaluated for the Medically Indigent (MI) program and the Percent programs, if 
applicable. NOTE: The caretaker is &included in the MI MFBU as an ineligible member 
with the caretaker's spouse in this example. 
SECTION: 50373 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 247 ~~~~:09/07/01 PAGE: 8D-4

[page 19]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
Section 1931 (b) MFBU 
Caretaker Grandmother 
Related Children 
MI MFBU 
Caretaker's Spouse (Grandfather) 
Own children 
Percent Proqrams 
<Grandmother (Parent)> 
<Grandfather (Parent)> 
Own Children 
If the caretaker and the related children are not eligible for Section 1931 (b) after applying 
Sneede rules, or the related children are above the age limit for Section 1931(b), all 
household members should be evaluated for the MN/MI and Percent programs, if 
applicable. 
Household 2 MNIMI MFBUs 
Caretaker grandmother; related children; a) Caretaker; related children 
caretaker's spouse; their own children 
(b) Caretaker and caretaker's spouse as 
ineligible members; their own eligible 
children. 
EXAMPLE 3 
Aunt requests Medi-Cal for herself, her sister's children (siblings or half siblings), and her 
spouse who is aged. They have no children of their own in the home. The aunt has no 
basis for linkage except as a non-parent caretaker relative to her nieces and nephews. 
If the caretaker and the related children are eligible for Section 1931 (b), the caretaker is 
not an ineligible member of histher spouse's MFBU. 
Section 1931 (b) MFBU 
Caretaker 
Related Children 
MN MFBU 
Caretaker's Spouse 
If the caretaker and the related children are not eligible for Section 1931 (b), Sneede rules 
apply. If the related children are eligible, but the caretaker is not, hetshe should be 
evaluated for the MN program. The caretaker is linked to the deprived related children. 
The caretaker is in the MFBU with histher spouse. 
SECTION: 50373 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 247 DATE: 09/07/01 PAGE: 8D-5

[page 20]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
Section 1931 (b) MFBU MN MFBU 
Related children Caretaker 
Caretaker's spouse 
If the caretaker passed Section 1931 (b) but the related children do not, the children should 
be evaluated for the MN program. They are not in the MFBU with the caretaker's spouse. 
The related children must be eligible for a zero share of cost (SOC) Medi-Cal program for 
the caretaker to be linked to Section 1931(b). If the related children have a SOC, they 
should be evaluated for the Percent programs. 
Section 1931 (b) 2 MN MFBUs 
Caretaker a) Related Children 
b) Caretaker's spouse 
Percent Proqrams MFBU 
Caretaker 
Related Children 
If the related children are not eligible for the Percent programs and they have income, each 
would be in hislher own MBU per Sneede rules. Use only each child's income and 
compare it to the FPL for the total family size of the original MFBU (the caretaker and the 
related children). 
If neither the caretaker and the related children are eligible for the Section 1931 (b), they 
should be evaluated for the MN program. 
Household 2 MN MFBU(s) 
Caretaker aunt; related children; 
caretaker's spouse. 
a) Caretaker; related children 
b) Caretaker as ineligible member. 
Caretaker's spouse (aged). 
EXAMPLE 4 
Grandmother requests Medi-Cal for herself, her grandchild, and her sister's children . She 
has no spouse or children of her own living in the home. A caretaker may choose 
eitherlany MFBU. Children who are not siblings or half siblings must be in their own 
MFBU. This example is the same for the Section 1931 (b) and MN programs. I 
SECTION: 50373 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 247 DATE:09/07/01 PAGE: 8D-6

[page 21]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
Household 2 Section 1931 (b) or MN MFBU(s) 
Grandmother; grandchild, sister's children a) Grandchild 
(b) Niece, nephew, caretaker. 
a) Grandchild, caretaker 
b) Niece, nephew. 
Example 5 
Grandmother requests Medi-Cal for herself and her grandchild. She is 65 years old and 
chooses not to be aided as an aged person. She has no income. Her spouse does not 
wish to be aided. This example is the same for the Section 1931 (b) and MN programs. 
Household 1 Section 1931 (b) or MN MFBU 
Caretaker grandmother, related child a) Caretaker; related child 
Caretaker's spouse 
If Grandmother wished to be aided as an aged person, she would be in the MN MFBU with 
her spouse. The related child would be in alone in a separate MFBU. 
Example 6 
Father requests Medi-Cal for himself, his children, and his nephew. The father may 
choose to be linked to either his nephew or his children. If he chooses to be aided in the 
nephew's MFBU and is eligible for Section 1931 (b), his income and property is not counted 
in the MFBU with his children. 
Household 2 Section 1931 (b) MFBUs 
Caretaker father, nephew 
Caretaker's children 
a) Caretaker, nephew 
b) caretaker's children 
or 
a) Nephew 
b) Caretaker and caretaker's children 
If the MFBU fails the Section 1931 (b) income or property test, Sneede rules apply. If the 
caretaker is eligible for Section 1931(b), but the nephew's or the children's income or 
property cause them to fail, the caretaker is not in the MN MFBU with the nephew or 
hislher children. 
SECTION: 50373 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 247 DATE: 09/07/01 PAGE: 80-7

[page 22]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
Section 1931(b) MFBU 2 MN MFBU's 
I 
Caretaker a) Nephew 
b) Caretaker's children 
If Sneede rules apply and the caretaker fails Section 1931 (b), but the nephew or histher 
children with income pass Section 1931 (b), the caretaker is alone in the MN MFBU. Any 
allocation that the caretaker made to histher children is deducted from histher income. 
Section 1931 (b) MFBU MN MFBU 
a) Nephew 
b) Caretaker's children 
Caretaker I 
Example 7 
Brother Bill requests Medi-Cal for himself (age 22), his younger brother Bobby (age 13), 
and his cousin John (age 5). Bill is the caretaker of both children who live in the home. The 
brother has a net nonexempt income of $2000 per month. The other children have no 
income. Assume the family is property eligible. Since we do not combine children who are 
not siblings or half siblings, the brother may choose to be linked to either child. 
Household 2 Section 1931 (b) MFBUs 
Caretaker, younger brother, cousin 
a) Caretaker, younger brother 
(b) Cousin 
a) Caretaker, cousin 
b) Younger brother 
Assume that the caretaker and the younger brother are in MFBU#I. The cousin is in his 
own separate MFBU. Evaluate the caretaker and the younger brother for Section 1931 (b). 
Section 1931 (b) MFBU #I Section 1931 (b) MFBU #2 
Caretaker $2000 Net nonexempt income Cousin $0 
Brother Bobby $0 Total $A! 
Total $2000 Limit (1 00%) $71 6 
Limit (1 00%) $ 968 
SECTION: 50373 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 247 DATE:09/07/01 PAGE: 8D-8

[page 23]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL - 
MFBU #I is not eligible. Apply SneedeIGamma since this is a caretaker relative case. No 
income is deemed from the caretaker to the child as he is not responsible for him. 
MBU #I MBU# 2 
Caretaker $2000 Net nonexempt income Brother Bobby $0 
Total $2000 Net nonexempt income Total 
Limit (100%) $ 71 6 Limit (1 00%) $71 6 I 
The caretaker is not eligible for Section 1931(b). He should be evaluated for the MN 
program 
MN MFBU 
Caretaker Bill $2000 
Total $2000 
Limit $ 600 
SOC $1400 
In month two, evaluate the Caretaker and brother Bobby using Section 1931 (b) recipient 
income rules. 
Family Members Living in the Home MFBU Composition 
Who are PA or Other PA 
Example 8 MFBU(s) 
Uncle, his brother's daughters (siblings or half siblings), his wife and their mutual children 
request Medi-Cai. His wife is incapacitated. Nieces are SSI recipients. The uncle may be 
linked to either the SSI nieces or to his wife and their own children. 
Household 1 Section 1931 (b) MFBU 
I 
Caretaker uncle, related children 
on PA; caretaker's spouse; their 
own children 
Caretaker; spouse; their own children. 
or 
2 Section 1931 (b) MFBU's 
a) Caretaker 
b) Spouse; Own children 
If the caretaker uncle chooses to link to the SSI nieces and is not eligible for the Section 
1931 (b) but his wife and children are eligible, he should be evaluated for the MN program. I 
SECTION: 50373 MANUAL LElTER NO.: 247 DATE: 09/07/01 PAGE: 8D-9

[page 24]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
Section 1931 (b) MFBU MN MFBU I 
Spouse 
Own Children 
Caretaker 
If the spouse and her children are not eligible for Section 1931(b), nor is the caretaker all 
should be evaluated for the MN program. 
2 MN MFBU's 
l 
a) Caretaker 
b) Caretaker as ineligible member, spouse, own children 
Example 9 
I 
Uncle, his brother's daughters (siblings or half siblings), his pregnant wife and their own 
mutual children request Medi-Cal. Nieces are SSI recipients. Uncle has no linkage except 
to nieces. Assume he is eligible for Section 1931 (b). The mutual children have no linkage; 
therefore, they and their mother should be evaluated for the MI program and the Percent 
programs, if applicable. 
Household Section 1931 (b) MFBU 
Caretaker uncle, related children on PA; Caretaker 
caretaker's spouse; their own children. 
MI Proqram MFBU 
I 
Wife, unborn, other mutual children. 
I 
If the caretaker is not financially eligible for the Section 1931 (b) program, he should be 
evaluated for the MN program using his nieces as linkage. He would be an ineligible 
member of the MFBU with the wife, unborn, and other mutual children in the MI or Percent 
program MFBU. 
MN MFBU MI Program MFBU I 
Caretaker Uncle Caretaker as an ineligible member, spouse, 
unborn, other mutual children I 
Example 10 
Grandmother requests Medi-Cal for herself and her grandchildren (siblings or half siblings). 
The grandfather receives SSI because he is aged and lives in the home. This example is 
I 
SECTION: 50373 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 247 DATE: 09/07/01 PAGE: 8D-10

[page 25]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILIN PROCEDURES MANUAL 
the same for the Section 1931 (b) and MN programs. 
Household 1 MFBU 
Caretaker grandmother; related children; Caretaker; related children. 
caretaker's spouse on PA 
Example 11 
Grandmother requests Medi-Cal for herself, her two grandchildren and her own children, 
The grandfather is employed and there is no other basis of deprivation; therefore, the 
grandparent's children are Medically Indigent or Percent program eligible. The 
grandmother's only linkage would be as the non-parent caretaker relative of her 
grandchildren. The grandson is 19 and is not eligible for Section 1931 (b). He is not in the 
MFBU with the children of the caretaker since they are not siblings or half-siblings. The 
granddaughter receives SSI and provides linkage for the grandmother. 
Household 
I 
Caretaker grandmother; related children 
Caretaker's spouse; their own children 
Section 1931 (b) MFBU MN MFBU MI MFBU 
I 
Caretaker Grandson Caretaker's Own Children 
<Grandfather> 
If the caretaker is ineligible for Section 1931(b), she would be in the MN MFBU with her 
grandson. She would also be in the MI MFBU as an ineligible member with her own 
children and her husband. 
2 MNlMl MFBUs 
a) Caretaker; related child 
I 
b) Caretaker as ineligible member; her spouse and own children. 
I 
Example 12 I 
Grandmother requests Medi-Cal for herself but not for her spouse. Her grandchild lives 
in the house and receives AFDC foster-care based Medi-Cal. Grandmother has no other 
linkage except her grandchild. This example is the same for the Section 1931 (b) and MN I 
programs. 
SECTION: 50373 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 247 DATED9/07/01 PAGE: 8D-11

[page 26]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
Household MFBU 
Caretaker grandmother; related child Caretaker 
on PA, caretaker's spouse. 
SECTION: 50373 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 247 DATE: 09/07/01 PAGE: 8D-12

[page 27]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
R-tions CHART FOR DETERMINING RELATEDMESS OF CARETAKER RELATIYES 
APPENDIX A 
HANDBOOK BEGINS HERE 
CHART FOR DETERMINING RELATEDNESS OF CARETAKER RELATIYES 
- - 
Great Cmt Gmt Cmt tmt Ant -Cmapa~t - 0lCh 
- 
I 
Great Aunt -Cxandpmt -Great Uncle 
11 The caretaker relative also inclzdes the spouse or fomr spat of the datives listed above. 
2) Ibe caretaker relative also inclcdes the adqtire parents and their datives as Listed above. 
1st Cousin 
Once-:-red 
HANDBOOK ENDS HERE 
)9M: 
Sister - QIU) - Brother -EalEbrother- 
MANUAL LEmR NO.EAS-W3 Effective 7/1/98 
Page 919 
Stepbrother 
SECTION: 50373 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 247 DATE: 09/07/01 PAGE: 8D-13 
- 
I I 
t I

[page 29]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
8E -- QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS REGARDING RE-~PQ~~SIBLE R&ATIVES 
Question No. 1: Is a legally separated couple living in the same home in the same MFBU? 
Answer No. 1: Yes. Couples who are legally separated continue to remain married under California law. 
If a legally separated couple is living together in the same home which contains common 
facilities (i.e., eating, bathing, etc.), the couple would be in the same MFBU per Section 
50351 and 50373. If the couple is divorced and living together, they are treated as 
unmarried parents if they have any children in the home. I 
Question No. 2: If an emancipated 19-year-old child living with hislher parents is self-supporting and not 
claimed by hislher parents as a tax dependent, is helshe in the same MFBU with the 
parents? 
Answer No. 2: Yes. The use of the term "emancipation" has no bearing on any Medi-Cal determination. ' 
Any unmarried or married 19 to 21 year old "child" living with hislher senior parents is in the 
MFBU with the senior parents and any siblings whether or not helshe is a tax dependent. 
Helshe is an ineligible member of the Section 1931(b) program since helshe is over the age 
limit for that program. Helshe may be eligible for the Medically Needy (MN) or Medically 
Indigent (MI) programs until age 21. If helshe has a deprived child of hislher own, helshe 
may be eligible for Section 1931(b) as an adult with his spouse or second parent if 
applicable, and the senior parents are not in the MFBU. See the Medi-Cal Procedures 
Manual, Article 8 G for more information. 
Question No. 3: Can a grandmother of a child living in her home be linked to ~edi-&a1 if the parent of the 
child is also living in the home? 
Answer No. 3: The Section 1931(b) program allows a caretaker relative or senior parent who has care and 
control of an adult parent's child to be aided regardless of whether or not the parent lives in 
the home. The MN, MI, and Percent programs do not allow the caretaker to be aided if the 
parent is in the home unless the parent is a minor. In this case, the caretaker may be linked 
to the minor parent, but is not responsible for the minor parent's child. See Article's 8D and 
8G for more information. NOTE: A parent who is only temporarily visiting the home is not 
considered living in the home. ai 
4 
Question NO.'!#: Must an unmarried father of an unborn who lives in the home -- with the mother of his unborn 
be included in the MFBU if he does not wish to be aided? 
Answer No. 4 : NO. If the father has no other children living in the home who are requesting Medi-Cat, he 
does not have to be included in the MFBU with the mother and his unborn until the child is 
age one. Because the implementation of Sneede v. Kizer would require that the unmarried 
parents be in separate MBUs if there were a share of cost or excess property and because 
the father's income and property would not affect the child under age one (Continued 
Eligibility), the father may opt out. However, if the father is unemployed or incapacitated and 
the mother wishes to be aided past the 60 day postpartum period and has no other basis 
for deprivation, the father may be included in the MFBU. 
I 
Question No. 5: A pregnant mother receiving Supplemental Security Income (SSI) payments is living in the 
home with the unborn's father and their mutual two year old. The father and the two year 
old apply for Medi-Cal. What is the MFBU composition?

[page 30]
L 
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
Answer No. 5 : The father, the unborn, and the two year old are in .pe,~ame MFBQ. The mother is not 
included because she is receiving public assistance (Section 50373). Note: when the 
pregnant mother is receiving cash benefits, the unborn is in the same MFBU with the father. I 
Question No. 6: If an Aid to Families With Dependent Children Foster Care (AFDC-FC) or county foster care 
child is living with a caretaker relative, may that relative be linked for Medi-Cal benefits? 
Answer No. 6 : Yes. The AFDC program as it existed on July 16, 1996, allowed caretaker relatives of 
children receiving foster care grants benefits to receive AFDC and automatic Medi-Cal; 
therefore, a caretaker relative of these children may also apply for Medi-Cal-only benefits, 
if otherwise eligible. This would be similar to parents or caretaker relatives that are linked 
to children who receive Public Assistance (PA), e.g., AFDC or SSI. NOTE: Children who are 
receiving PA are not in the MFBU with the caretaker relative. 
Question No. 7: If the stepparent refuses to cooperate or does not wish to be aided, can the separate child 
of the spouse receive Medi-Cat? 
Answer No. 7 : Yes. Sneede v. Kizer procedures changed Section 50375. The mother would be an 
ineligible member in the MFBU with her child regardless of whether the stepparent requests 
aid or fails to cooperate. If the mother, mutual children, or his separate children wish to be 
aided, the father is required to be in the MFBU. 
I 
Question No. 8: If a child is receiving SSItSSP or CalWORKs, may the parents be linked? If so, what is the 
MFBU composition? 
I 
Answer No. 8: Yes. The parents are alone in the same MFBU. 
Question No 9: What is the MFBU composition when a household contains both parents and a stepparent 
or married and unmarried parents with mutual and separate children? Example: Mother, 
her husband, her boyfriend, with mutual and separate children of both men living in the 
same home. 
Answer No. 9: Combine the household in one MFBU. If the family is over the incornelproperty limits or 
has a share of cost, Sneede rules apply. -2 
Question No. i0: Can a senior mother living in the home with her daughter and the daughter's baby be linked 
to her 19 year old daughter if the daughter and her baby rkFeive CalWORKs or Section 
1931 (b)? 
Answer No. 10: Yes. The senior mother is eligible for the MN program if her 19 year old daughter is 
receiving CalWORKs or Section 1931(b) and is deprived because the MN program defines 
a child as a person under 21. The senior mother would be in her own MFBU. Care and 
control is not an issue for the MN program if the "children" are under age 21 and living 
with the senior parent. 
Question No. 11: A mother living in the home with only one child who is disabled, age 18 and not enrolled 
in school requests Medi-Cal. May she use this child for linkage? 
Answer No. 11: No. This child is defined in Section 50014 as an adult.

[page 31]
i 
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
Question No. 12: A couple has started adoption proceeding for an unrelated child with whom they are living. 
May this couple apply for Medi-Cal using the child,bfor ,, linkage? 
Answer No. i2: No, not until the adoption is final. 
Question No. 13: If two persons of the same sex who live together register as domestic partners, would they 
be financially responsible for each other if one or both apply for Medi-Cal? 
Answer No. 13: No. Domestic partners are not financially responsible for each other except for any income 
that they may contribute to the household in excess of their share of the expenses. 
Question No. 14: If a child between 18 and 21 who is away at college and claimed as a tax dependent is 
considered a child for the MNIMI programs and in the MFBU with hislher parents, may the 
parents use himlher for linkage if he is deprived? - 
Answer No. 14: Yes. 
Question No. 15: If a deprived child age 19 who is claimed as a tax dependent by hislher parents is living out 
of state and does not plan to return, may the parents use himlher for linkage? 
Answer No. 15: No. This child is not considered to be temporarily absent from the home. More information 
about absence can be reviewed in the Medi-Cal Eligibility Procedures Manual Article 1 B 
entitled "Persons Living in the Homen and Article 5C "Deprivation." 
Question No. 16: What are the consequences of excluding a child from the MFBU? 
Answer No. 16: Although a parent may allocate some of hislher income to the excbded child, the family 
size is reduced which affects the incomelproperty limits for the family. Since Sneede rules 
would apply if the child has incomelproperty, it may be more beneficial to notexclude the 
child unless there are other issues involved such as not wanting to pursue medical support. 
NOTE: Counties must inform parents about the consequences of excluding a child. 
Question No. 17: If a relative of a child had histher marriage annulled, may the former spouse of the relative 
be considered a caretaker relative? 
Answer No. 17: No. An annulment means that the marriage waq invalid and did not exist. 
-4 
Question No.'18: Is a stepparent with no deprived child of hislher own, potentially eligible for Medi-Cal? --. 
Answer No. 18: A stepparent with no deprived children living in the home may be an essential person for the 
- Section 1931(b) program; however, he may not be aided in the MN program unless hislher 
spouse is incapacitated. See the Medi-Cal Eligibility Procedures Manual 5C, 5s and 8G for 
more information.

[page 33]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
. . 
8F- SNEEDE V. KIZER LAWSUIT PROCEDURES 
AS MODIFIED BY GAMMA v. BELSHE 
I. OVERVIEW 
IMPORTANT: The Sneede and Gamma lawsuits affect cases with Sneede class members as well 
as those with no Sneede class members. 
Federal and State law limit financial responsibiltty for medical care to parent-for-child and 
spouse-for-spouse. This means that the income and property of a parent or spouse may only be 
used in determining Medi-Cat eligibility and share of cost (SOC) for himself/herself, hisher spouse, 
and/or natural or adopted child(ren). 
These limitations were upheld in the Sneede v. Kizer and Gamma v. Belshe lawsuits. 
Under the court's order, family budget unit composition rules must ensure that: 
A stepparenfs income and property are not considered available to hislher spouse's separate 
children; 
An unmarried couple's income and property are not considered available to each other nor 
to their partner's separate children; 
A child's own nonexempt income and property are not considered available to anyone but 
. ~ himlher, and 
A caretaker relative's income and property are not considered available to anyone but - - himiher. 
Note: Some ~rovisions also affect cases that do not have a Sneede case member. See items 10 
and 12 below. 
2. EFFECTNE DATE 
Effective April 1, 1991, counties must apply the following procedures to Sneede class members who 
are: (1) households containing a stepparent; (2) children who have their own nonexempt income 
and/or property; (3) unmarried parents who have mutual children; and (4) nonparent caretaker 
relatives, if their inclusion resub in a SOC or ineligibiii-due to excess resources. 
This means that when the MFBU has a SOC or is ineligible due to excess property, then income and 
property must be considered in the following manner: 
Only a naturavadoptive parent(s)' income or property may be used to determine a child's 
eligibility and SOC; 
Income or property of spouses may be used to determine the SOC or eligibility for each 
other; 
An unmarried partner's income or property can only be used to determine eligibility or SOC 
for himselflhenelf; and hislher naturalfadoptive children; 
SECTION NO.: 50373 MANUAL LETTER NO,: 2 1 2  ATE: my 10 8F-1

[page 34]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
The nonexempt income or property of a child can only be used to determine eligibility or SOC 
for himsetflherself; and 
I 
The income or property of a caretaker relabe (who is an eligible member of the same MFBU 
as the child for whom care is provided) cannot be used to determine SOC or eligibilrty for 
anyone but himself/herself. 
If the MFBU has excess property andlor a SOC and it contains a Sneede class member (described 
above), the county will apply Sneede procedures to the property or SOC determination. The family 
does NOT get a choice as to whether Sneede procedures are applied. 
Persons affected prior to April 1, 1991 were allowed to file an appeal retroactively to January 1, 1990. 
3. LINKAGE TO THE MEDI-CAL PROGRAM 
The court order does not impact any existing Medi-Cal regulations on linkage. The county will 
continue to determine the MFBU composition and Medi-Cal linkage (e.g., coverage is available to: 
pregnant women; individuals under 21 years old; AFDGlinked parents, caretaker relatives and 
children; and aged, blind, disabled individuals) as specified under existing Medi-Cal regulations. 
However, if one or more family members are determined to be property or otherwise ineligible under 
these procedures, the county must determine whether linkage still exists for the remaining family 
members. In other words, the parenwcaretaker must have at least one eligible child remaining 
.unless they have their own linkage. Effective March 1, 1998, properly is being disregarded for 
children in the Percent Programs; therefore, if the only child is deprived and eligible for one of these 
programs despite being property ineligible for regular Medi-Cal, the parent(s) would continue to be 
linked. 
4. RESPONSIBLE RUAflVE DETERMINATION 
In order to properly allocate income andlor properly under the spouse-for-spouse'and parent-forchild 
requirement, the county must idenw the family members including excluded children for whom the 
spouse or parent is financially responsible. The unborn child does not receive an income or property 
allocation nor do Public Assistance (PA). Other PA, or persons in long-term care (LTC) or board and 
care (B&C). 
Example: The family consists of a married couple, their mutual child, their unbom child and the 
husband's separate child. The responsible relative determination and income andlor resource 
allocation would be as follows: 
Parent/Spouse: Dad Mom 
Others for Whom Mom Dad 
Parent/spouse is Mutual child Mutual child 
Responsible: &9beme 
Separate child 
'NOTE: Altbough the unbom is part of the budget unit, he/she should not be listed because there are 
no income or pmpew allocations nor should PA or Other PA persons or LTC/B&C persons be listed. 
SECTION NO.: 50373 MANUAL LEITER NO.: 2

[page 35]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
5. MINI-BUDGET UNITS 
The tern "mini budget unit" (MBU) will refer.to the new family sub-units derived from the initial MFBU 
composition if the MFBU has either a SOC or excess property and the MFBU contains a Sneede 
class member. To prevent improper cb-mingling of income and property when determining SOC and 
property eligibilrty, the county will establish separate MBUs based upon certain family relationships 
and whether a child has income or property of hislher own. Consequently, a single family may have 
numerous MBUs. NOTE: A .responsible relative determination .is not the same as an MBU 
determination. 
Net nonexempt income allocated from a parent or spouse (also known as a responsible relative) to 
a naturalladopted child or spouse will be added to that child's or spouse's own income after the 
earned and unearned income deductions and the parental needs allowance have been applied. The 
child's or spouse's total net nonexempt income (which includes the parentaVspousa1 allocation) will 
be added to the total net nonexempt income of other family members in the MBU, if any. The MBU's 
total net nonexempt income will be compared to the maintenance need for that MBU. 
It is possible that the MBU compositions for the property determination will not be the same as the 
MBU compositions for the'SOC determinations. This is due to considerations such as children who 
may or may not have both income and property of their own, or a stepparent who may or may not 
have income and property, etc. 
The following guidelines shall apply when determining the MFBU and, MBU compositions: 
Pregnant Woman and Unborn (See Section IOC-E) 
When an MFBU contains a pregnant minor and her unborn, the unborn will be in the 
. same MBU with its mother. 
If the mother is PA or Other PA, the unborn is placed in the father's MFBUhIBU. If 
neither parent is in the MFBU, the unborn is not in the MFBU nor in an MBU. 
When the pregnant minor is riving with her parent(s), her other children and/or the 
second parent of her unborn (boyfriendlspouse) and all are requesting Medi-Cal, the 
unbom should remain with the pregnant minor in both MFBU's. 
Family members from the same MFBU can be listed in only one MBU. 
Married spouses and mutual children with no income or property of their own are in the same 
MBU. 
Each mutual or separate child of married parents with hidher own income or property is in 
hidher own separate MBU. 
Separate children of married spouses with no income or property of their own are together 
in a separate MBU from their parent 
Single parents and children with no income or property are in the same MBU. 
Unmarried parents are in separate MBUs. 
SECTION NO.: 50373 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 2 j 2 DATE: 1 0 1999 SF-3

[page 36]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
Mutual children of unmarried parents with no income or property are together in a separate 
MBU from their parents. 
Separate children of unmanied parents with no income or property are in the same separate 
MBU with their parent 
Persons that are excluded from the MFBU or that are PA or Other PA are not in any MBU. 
A nonparent caretaker relative that is in the MFBU because helshe chooses to be linked to 
a relative child is in separate MBU from the child. 
6. INCOME AND PROPERTY ALLOCATlONS 
One of the major differences between Sm, and non-Sneede cases is the treatment of income and 
property. Under Sneede there is an equal allocation of property from the spouse andlor parent to 
'himself/herseR, hislher spouse andfor natural or adoptive children. The original Sneede court order 
treated income in a similar manner, however, on November 16, 1995, the court in Gamma v. Belshe' 
ruled that the income deeming procedures in sneede violated federal law. The court  led that the 
Department of Health Services should not deem income from a financially responsible relative to any 
other person until a suffrcient amount of the responsible relative's income has been allocated to meet 
his or her own needs. That means that 
Each parent will be allowed a $600 income deducfion for hisher needs {which represents the 
maintenance need income level (MNIL) for one) prior to equally allocating income to the family 
members for whom heme is responsible (excluding himsefMersel9. The parent will not receive any 
portion of the latter allocation. The $600 or the parent's total net income ifless than $600 will be used 
in determining the SOC for the parent's ME~U. This is referred to as a parental needs allowance. 
This order-was effective for new applicants no later than July 22, 1997 and retroactive to 
November 16,1995 for ongoing cases. 
The following rules apply when allocating income and property: 
A child's own nonexempt income or property cannot be used to determine eligibility or SOC 
for anyone other than hirnselflhersetf. Note: Exempt income, e.g., student earnings, is not 
considered income when determining whether or not to apply Srteede procedures. 
Each unmarried partner's income or property can only be used to determine eligibility or SOC 
for himsetflhersetf and hislher own naturalladoptwe children; 
Each married partner can only allocate separate and one-half community property to 
himself/henelf, hiier spouse, and own naturalladoptive children. 
Each mamed partner retains a $600 or less parental needs deduction/ allowance. Heishe . 
can only allocate income if heishe has more than that amount to hislher spouse, and own 
naturalladoptive children. 
There is never an income or property allocation from anyone other than a spouse Or 
naturauadoptive parent 
-- - 
, 
SECflON NO.: 50373 MANUAL LFCTER NO.: 2 1 2 A: 10 1959 8F4

[page 37]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
There is never an income or property allocation to an unborn. The unbom is included in the 
maintenance need income limit (MNIL) and property limit of the MFBU and MBU which 
contains its mother. If the mother is PA or Other PA and therefore not in the MFBU, the 
unbom is in the father's MFBU/MBU. If neither parent is in the MFBU, the unbom is not in 
the MFBU nor in an MBU. 
If the mother is a pregnant minor and in an MFBU with her own senior parent(s), the unbom 
may be in that MFBU if the parent or caretaker relative reports the pregnancy. The county 
must ensure the confidentialrty of the pregnancy and may not take any action to include the 
unbom in the senior parent(s)' MFBU based only on the minor's report of her pregnancy. 
There is a property and income allocation to an excluded naturalladopted child even if the 
county has not been provided enough information to allow the usual excluded child 
deduction. Excluded children are not included in the MNIL or property limit nor used to link 
other famity members in the MFBU. 
There is a property and income allocation to ineligible persons. Ineligible persons are 
included in the MNIL and property limit but are not used to link other family members in the 
MFBU. 
Income and property allomtion amounts to eligible, ineligible, and excluded family members 
will be equal. The amount of the allocation is not reduced by the amount of the spouse's'k 
child's own income or property. 
7. MAINTENANCE NEED INCOME LEVELS AND PROPERM LIMITS 
An entire MFBU may initially be determined ineligible due to excess property or have a SOC. 
However, once Sneede procedures are applied, some family members may be determined property 
eiigible while others may continue to be ineligible due to excess property. NOTE: /%per& ineligibility 
for a child is nof established until the county determines the child is ineligible for a Percent program 
where properfy is disregarded. Similarty, some family members may have zero SOC, while other may 
have a SOC if they are in different MBUs. Each MBU maintenance need income level (MNIL) and 
property limit will be determined in the following manner: 
Separate MBU determinations for property and SOC may be required. This would depend 
upon considerations such as whether or not children have both income and property of their 
own, or whether or not a stepparent has both income and property, etc. 
Example: Four siblings with their own property are placed in four separate MBUs for the 
properfy defennination. However, not all of these children have income of their own. For the 
SOC determination, the siblings wifh no income of their own are grouped fogether (with or 
without their parent(s) depending upon whether the MFBU contains a stepparenf or an 
unmanied couple with mutual children); each of the siblings with h;s/her own income is 
placed in a separate MBU. 
If one or more MBUs are property ineligible, those persons are ineligible and may not be 
used for linkage. The 'countyn must determine whether linkage for the other family members 
still exists before continuing with the inwmelSOC determination. NOTE: This statement does . 
I 
not apply fo 1931(b) determinations, which determines income first. Caution should be used 
not to issue Medi-Cal cards to ineligible family members. 
SECliON NO.: 50373 MANUAL LETTER NO.: .2 1 4 -DATE: - -. 1x244. g~-s

[page 38]
* 
- 
MEDI-CAL ELIGlBlLJTY PROCEDURES MANUAL . 
Amounts: 
a Full Amount 
. Any time there is an adult in an MBU, that MBU will receive the full MNlL or 
property limit based upon the number of persons in the MBU. 
Each MBU containing a nonparent caretaker relative will receive the full 
MNIL or property limit 
An ineligible minor parent in hislher child's MBU is considered an adult 
Children who have no parent in the MFBU (e.g., the parents are absent or 
are PA or Other PA) receive a full MNIL or property limit 
b. Prorated Amount 
Children who live with one or both natural or adoptive parents (not 
stepparents) who are not PA or Other PA receive a prorated amount based 
on the number of children in the MBU and the number of parents in the 
MFBU. See the attached MNIL chart. 
-7. 
Example: Two children in fhe MBU with fwo parents in the original MFBU 
have a prorated MNlL need of $550. This amount is half of the regular MNIL 
of $Z, 100 for four persons. (2 children in MBU + (2 children + 2 parents) = 
2+4=X) 
The following allocation rules apply only to property (not income): 
A Married couple with only mutual children: The married couple's total property is combined. 
The combined properly is equally allocated to each spouse and each mutual child. .' 
B. Stepparent household: Each married person has hidher separate property and one-haw 
share of the community property. This property is equalty allowted to himsetf/herself, hisher 
spouse, and hisher naturaUadoptive children. 
C. Unmarried couple with mutual children: An unmarried couple has no community property. 
Each parent's separate property is equally allocated to hielfherself and to hidher 
naturauadopted child(ren). .- 
D. Only net nonexempt property win be allocated to a spouse and/or naturaliadoptive child(ren)- 
In other words, property deductions will be applied prior to the allocation. When ineligibility 
occurs before and after the Sneede determination (after considering the allocated share of 
property from a responsible relative and the appiicantlbeneficiary's own property), the county 
shaU not reallocate the responsible relative's property to the remaining family members. 
Ineligible family members will continue to receive a property allocation. 
SECTION NO.: 50373 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 2 1 4 DATE: All6 2 d- 8F-6

[page 39]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
E. The following exemption rules apply: 
a All parents may choose to pass on exemptions to their children. 
Once the motor vehicle exemption has been applied to the vehicle, the entire vehicle 
is exempt even though the car may be owned by more than one' person in the 
MFBU. This exemption is applied before any properly is allocated by a spouse or 
parent. 
For example, a car is owned by a pregnant woman and her teenage son who are 
botb applying for Medi-Cal. They are both Iisted on the pink slip and are presumed 
to have equal ownership interest (which is subject to rebuttal under Sneede). The 
county applies the car exemption and exempts the entire car . . . not just one 
person's half interest in it. 
a A full set of property exemptions will be allowed to a nonparent caretaker relative if 
helshe wants Medi-Cal and is included in the MFBU with the children for whom care 
is provided. Another full set of property exemptions will be allowed to the children 
for whom care is provided. 
For example: An MFBU contains a grandmother with no property and two teenage 
grandchildren. The two grandchildren each own a car valued at $7,000 each. The 
grandmother is allowed one full set of property exemptions although she has no 
property against which to apply the exemptions, and she may at pass her 
exemptions on to the chifdren because she is not financially responsible for them (as 
opposed to a naturaVadoptive parent). Since the children are also allowed one full 
set of property exemptions, the county may exempt only one of the teenageis cars. 
The remaining car will be included in the owner's property reserve. 
Each unmarried partner will be allowed a full set of property exemptions; however, 
the mutual child may not receive two sets of exemptions. One of the parents may 
pass on hlslher exemptions to a different mutual child or to a separate child. If either 
unmarried partner does not choose to apply the property exemptions against hidher 
own property, or has no property, theexemptions may be passed on to hislher child. 
. . If unmarried partners co-own ~tiihed other real property with other persons in the 
MFBU, the exempbon may be spread out and applied in a variety of ways which will 
benefit the members of the MFBU. 
a In addition to the motor vehicle and the first $6,000 of utilized property exemptions, 
each unmamed partner will atso be allowed one principal residence exemption. 
Each unmarried partner's exemptions may be passed on to hislher naturaVadopted 
child if the parent has either no property to apply against the exemption or chooses 
to pass on the exemption in order to benefit the child. 
Example 7: The MFBU includes an unmamed couple with mutual children. The 
unmarried man owns House A; the unmanied woman owns House B. They both live 
in House A. House A is exempt as the man's principal residence. The unmanied 
woman states that she intends to retum to House B to live in someday. House 5 is 
exempt as the woman's principal residence. 
SECTION NO.: 50373 MANUAL LETIERNO.: 2 1 2  ATE: YAY 1 o 1399 BF-7

[page 40]
MEDI-CAL ELlGlBlLrrY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
Exampie 2: The MFBU includes an unrnanied couple who cwwn Houses A and 5; 
fhey both live in House A. The county exempts the woman 3 half-interest rh House 
B because she says it was her former principal residence and that she intends to 
return to it someday. Therefore, her haif of House B is exempt and the equity in her 
haif of House A is included in her property reserve. Her total net nonexempt 
property is then equally allocated to herself and to her naturavadopted children. ff 
she does not want House A to be included in her property reserve at all, she will 
need to transfer the property to someone else. Or, she may utilize her half of 
House A and the county can exempt up to the first $6,000. 
The county exempts the han's half-interest in House A because he stated that it is 
his principal residence. The county will apply the procedures described above to 
his ownership interest in House B. In order for them to retain and exempt both 
houses, fhey may need to transfer the half-interest in one of the properfies to the 
other partner so that each house is fully owned by only one of them. 
a For continuing cases which do not have an increasekhange in property, persons will 
be allowed to request a change of the property exemption to permit eligibility of an 
MFBU member who is currently property ineligible and in need of Medi-Cal effective 
the month following the month of the request. 
a For new applicants, or a continuing case in which: (1) there is an increaselchange 
in property, or (2) the case switches from regular Medi-Cal case processing in one 
month to Sneede procedures m the following month and (3) one or more MBUs are 
property-ineligible. these persons will be allowed ten days from the date of the notice 
of action (NOA) to request a change of their property exemptions. The change in 
exemptions will be effective retmactive to the first month in which the adverse action 
occurred. These procedures will apply regardless of whether the changelincrease 
in property is reported timely. If the applicantibeneficiary does not contact the county 
timely, within ten days from the date of the NOA, to request a change in the property 
exemptions, the county will make the change effective the month following the month 
of the request 
F. DeniaVDiscontinuance Due to Excess Property 
The county will include a statement on the denialldiscontinuance NOA which informs the 
property-ineligible MBUs of the ~les to request a change of the property exemptions. Upon 
request, the county will first ask the family to prioritite the family members who need 
Medi-Cal benefits. The county will then be able to determine which exemptions would be 
most advantageous. The county will apply the exemptions retroactively to the first month in 
which the adverse action occurred. If the property exemptions change, the MBU 
compositions may also change because a person with exempt property is treated the same 
as someone with no property. 
NOTE: Effective March 1, 1998, property will be disregarded for all children in the ~eicent' 
Programs. Therefore, even though the child may be property ineligible under the initial 
Sneede determination, the child may be eligible for the Percent programs where property is 
disregarded. 
SECTION NO.: 50373 MANUAL mR NO.: 2 1 2 DATE: YAY 10 t9S9 8F-8

[page 41]
MEDI-CAL ELlGlBILlN PROCEDURES MANUAL 
Example A: The MFBU in an on-going case consists of a stepparent household and has 
excess property. After Sneede procedures are applied and MBUs are established, only 
some family members are property eligible. In October, the famiiy reports that one of the 
property ineligible children needs Medi-Cal. Assume the child has too much income to 
qualify for the Percent program. The family requests the eligibility worker (w to review the 
case to determine whether eligibility can be established for that child. The EW reviews the 
exemptions and determines that eligibillrty can be established for the child effective November 
(the month after the month of request). 
Example 5: A family with multiple vehicles files a Medi-Cal application in September. The 
MFBU contains a Sneede dass member and has excess property. After Sneede procedures 
are applied, one of the children is property ineligible. The county sends a denial notice to that 
child on September 15th. The family contact the EW within ten days from the date of the 
NOA and requests that the property exemptions be changed to permit eligibility for the 
property ineligible child. The county will review the exemptions to determine whether 
eligibility can be established for that child retroactive to September. 
Jointly Held Assets 
Section 50402 states that if evidence clearly establishes that property held fully or jointly in 
the name of an applicantlbeneficiary does not belong to the applicantlbeneficiary, then such 
property will not be considered available to them. These same regulations will apply to 
persons within the same MFBU. In other words, the county will first determine whetherany 
member of the filing unit holds legal We to property. If so, then legal ownership is established 
and that nonexempt property counts towards the owner's property reserve. If property is 
jointly owned with another member of the MFBU, the county will presume equal ownership 
of the property. If the applicant or beneficiary who holds legal title to property (either solely 
or jointly) states that the nonexempt property belongs to someone else (who is either within 
or outside of the MFBU), then the applicant or beneficiary may provide evidence which clearly 
substantiates that allegation. Please note that signed affidavits alone are not sufficient 
evidence. 
Example A. The MFBU includes a father and his teenage son. On the MC 27 0 ?hey list the 
son as the sole owner of a second car. However, the car registration lists only the father's 
name. When asked about the discrepancy, the father states that his son paid for the car with 
his own money, but for insurance purposes, the car is registered in the father's name only. 
They present a bill of sale whicf, shows that the son purchased the car and the bank 
passbook shows the withdrawal from the son's savings account. The verification clearfy 
establishes that the son is the actual owner. It is not necessary to transfer legal title to the 
actual owner when the individuals are in the same MFBU. 
Evample 5: The MFBU indudes a father and his teenage son who state on the 'MC 210 that 
they co-own a second car which the regisbation dip confirms. The county will presum? equal 
ownership of the car fie., they each own 50 percent). The family may rebut the presumption 
of equal ownership to establish the actual ownership interest 
?1.2 
w -- 
SECTION NO.: 50373 MANUAL LETTER NO.: DATE: ilAr191993 8F-9

[page 42]
MEDICAL ELIGIBILIlY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
H. Joint Bank Accounts 
Section 50453(a)(2) states that accounts held with persons who are not family members are 
considered available in their entirety if the applicant or beneficiary has unrestricted access 
. to the funds unless evidence is submitted which clearly establishes ownership of the funds. 
Therefore, when there is a joint account with nonfamily members, the cbunty will first 
determine whether the funds are available to anyone in the MFBU. 
If there is unrestricted access to the funds by anyone in the MFBU, the county will determine 
the full amount of the funds (unless successfully rebutted) as available to the MFBU. If there 
is moie than one MFBU member listed on the joint account, then the county will presume 
equal ownership of the funds among those MFBU members (i-e., the fund will be equally . 
divided among the MFBU members who are listed on the account), subject to rebuttal. Note: 
When a parent or nonparent caretaker relative states that the account belongs to a minor 
child in the MFBU and the county determines that it is the child's account, the parent's or 
caretaker's name does not need to be removed from the account 
Example A: A child has a bank account which the parents established for the child's future 
education. The parents are listed on the account with the child; there is no trust document 
to govern use and access to the funds. Since all three members of the MFBU have access 
to the bank account, the county will presume equal ownership of the funds and divide if 
equally among the three. The presumption of equal ownership may be rebutted. 
Example 6: An unmamed couple is listed as joint owners on a savings account with the 
unmamed man's aged mother. - The couple and their mutual children are applying for 
Medi-Cal. The county has determined that the unmamed couple has unrestricted access to 
the account; the entire account is presumed available to them. This presumption may be 
rebutted. The unmarried man and woman are each presumed to own a half of the funds in 
the account. The mutual child wilf receive an allocation of the funds. 
9. INCOME DETERMINATION 
A General rules: 
The county will usually follow the 'name on the checkn rule in determining ownership 
of income. However, certain types of income may be issued in the name of a payee 
on behalf of another family member. Therefore, the county will need to verify 
ownership of income as well as the gross amount Many agencies (e.g., Social 
Secunty Administration) will issue benefits for more than one person under one 
name. A wife, widow, or ex-spouse may receive a benefit check for herself andior 
on behalf of her children. Mout the award letter (or other equivalent verification), 
the county will be unable to determine the gross benefit amount for each person. 
This could result in improper allocation of income. 
A child's support payments may only be attributed to the child for whom the 
payments were intended. See Section 9(C) - Deductions. 
Interest income from a small savings account to a child wnstikrtes income and 
results in a Sneede case if the MFBU has a SOC. 
SECTION NO.: 50373 MANUAL LEnTR NO.: ;2 1 2 DATE: MhY 1 0 1999 8F-I0

[page 43]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
Parental allocations from a parent in LTC constitute income to the child; therefore, 
Sneede rules apply if the MFBU has a soc as wiH allocations from a parent in LTC 
that is deemed to hisher child or from a stepparent to his spouse which resutts in 
a SOC. 
Income available from PAfOther PA or Pickle persons which was not used by the 
PNOther PA program or for Pickle, which exceeds the payment level for that 
program should be equally allocated to each born person in the MFBU for whom that 
person is responsible. Any of these allocations which are to children in the MFBU 
will constjtute income to the child; therefore, Sneede rules apply if the MFBU has a 
SOC. Nothing is allocated under the Sneede rules the PA/Other PA or Pickle 
person as hislher needs are already met by that program; however, the county will 
allow that portion of the MFBU member's income, which was used to determine PA 
eligibility as a deduction against that MFBU member's income. See Section 9(C) - 
Deductions. 
B. Receipt of In-Kjnd Income 
A child who receives in-kind income and has no other income is still treated as a 
Sneede clasj member. 
If the entire MFBU receives unearned in-kind income, it is equally prorated amor@ 
the members of the MFBU (do not include excluded or PA persons). 
Example: 77?e MFBU consists of a married couple and their two mutual children. 
Tfie family receives free rent and utilities. The unearned in-kind income of $277 is 
equally prorated among the four people. Each person's share of in-kind income 
equals $69.25. The parenfs'share is not reallocated to their children. 
If unearned in-kind income is only received by certain members of the MFBU, it is 
charged as income only to those members of the MFBU. In-kind incorne received 
by a parent is counted as income in the parent's MBU but is not allocated to the 
naturaVadopted children in a separate MBU. It is subtracted out prior to allocating. 
Unearned in-kind income is subject to the $20 any income disregard if aged, blind, 
or disabled (ABD) deductions are applicable. Earned in-kind income is treated as 
wages to the employed person and is subject to the allowable earned income 
deductions. 
When a full item of need is provided by a member of the MFBU or a responsible 
relative. there is no in-kind income. 
When there is an unborn chifd in the MFBU and the pregnant woman receives 
uneamed in-kind income, include the unbom when prorating the income. The 
unbom's share of the in-kind income is added to the pregnant woman's share. The 
total of the unborn's and the pregnant woman's share of in-kind income is used to 
determine the pregnant woman's net nonexempt income only; it is not allocated to 
anyone. 
SECTION NO.: 50373 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 2 f 4 DATE: - .. AUG 2 4 . = 8F-11

[page 44]
--- - 
*. 
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
Example: The MFBU consists of Bin and Bobbie, a married couple, their mutual born 
child, and a mutual unbom. They live rent-free in a house owned by Bill's mother. 
The value of the fie rent is $236 for a family of four. This amount is prorated 
among the four MFBU members; each person's share of the in-kind income is $59. 
Although the born child has no other income, his prorated portion of the unearned 
in-kind income conwes separate income and Sneede pmdures will apply if the 
MFBU has a SOC. The unborn's share of the in-kind income is added to the 
mother's; her total iMnd income is $1 78. The EW wdl back out the parents' in-kind 
income before allocating to the mutual child and then add back the in-kind income 
after allowing the parental allocations. 
If an unmarried parent of an unborn is not in the MFBU (fails to cooperate or does 
not wish to receive Mediil) and is providing in-kind income to the pregnant mother, 
the county will count this as income to the mother but no inkind is counted to the 
unborn. I 
When a stepparent is in the MFBU, hier income and property are counted as part 
of the MFBU's budget computation. Therefore, there is no in-kind income from the 
stepparent to the other members of the MFBU. However, when a stepparent is not 
in the MFBU but is providing a full item of need, the county wilt determine the value 
of income in-kind based upon the number of stepchildren in the MFBU. The value 
of the in-kind income is equally prorated to only the stepchildren which is considere& 
to be the child's own income. There is no in-kind jncome to a spouse. 
kample: John and Mary are mam-ed; they have a mufual child and Mary has two 
separate children. They want Medi-Cal for Mary's two separate children only. John 
pays all of the bfls for the entire household. The MFBU consists of Mary as an 
ineligible parent and her separate child~n. The county detennines that the in-kind 
income for two persons is $475 and will charge each child with $237.50 in-kind 
income ($475 divided by two). Mary is not charged with any in-kind income. 
Earned in-kind income is considered wages to the wage earner. It is subject to 
applicable eamed income deductions and, if Sneede applies, it is allocated to those 
persons for whom the wage eamer is responsible. 
Example: The MFBU consists of John and Mary, a manied couple, and their two 
mutual children. John is an apartment manager and receives a free apartment in lieu 
of cash wages. The value of the in-kind income is $236 for a family of four. The 
in-kind income is considered to be John's wages and subject to fhe applicable 
eamed income deduction. The children have no income of their own. Therefore, 
this is not a Sneede case even if the MFBU has a SOC. 
C. Deductions . - 
Only net nonexempt income will be allocated to a spouse andior naturauadoptive 
children. In other words, income deductions will be applied prior to the allocations. 
Income deductions will be applied to a child's own gross income before it is 
combined with the net nonexempt income allocated from the parent(s). 
SECTION NO.: 50373 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 2 1 4 DATE: AU6 9 4 I999 8F-92 
- 
. -

[page 45]
MEDI-CAL ELlGIBlLIN PROCEDURES MANUAL 
Each ABD Medically Needy (MN) child or adult, or spouse of an ABD-MN person or 
parent of a blind or disabled child shall receive a full set of the applicable ABD 
income deductions and exemptions, i.e., the $65 plus one-half earned income 
deduction and $20 any income deducb'on for ABDs. All other family members shall 
receive applicable AFDC-MNIMedically Indigent deductions. 
Deductions for health insurance premiums are allowed only to the family member 
from whose income the health insurance premium is paid. 
The $50 per month deduction for child/spousal support payments as described in 
Section 50554.5 will be prorated among the family members for whom the support 
payments are intended. Any unused portion of the prorated deduction is equally 
allocated to the other family members for whom the deduction would apply. 
Example: Assume that in September a mother receives 5200 child support payments 
for each of her two children. The payments are intended for the month of 
September. The $50 deduction is prorated among the two children and they will 
each receive a deduction of $25 from their child support payments. 
Child care deductions are not allowed for child care payments for children outside 
the MFBU. Example: Only the separate children of one spouse want Medi-Cal. The 
ineligible parent is employed and pays child care costs for other children who are not 
in the MFBU. The county may not deduct the child care payments for those other 
children from the ineligible parent's into* per Seaon 50553.5. 
Child support payments are income to the child even if the parent or caretaker is 
receiving the payments on thechild's behalf. 
a. If the payments are voluntary, the county should ask the parent or caretaker 
relative to obtain a statement from the absent parent verifying: (1) the 
nature of the payments (i.e., child or spousal or.both), (2) for whom the 
payments are intended, and (3) if two or more persons are recipients of the 
support payment, the proper allocation to each recipient If the absent 
parent is noncooperative, the county will accept the parent's or caretaker's 
allegation of these items. If the parent does not know, the county may 
equally prorate the payments among those for whom the income is 
intended. The file should be documented that the absent parent is 
noncooperative. 
b. If the child or spouse is receiving a partial payment of courtordered 
childlspousal support, the county should request a copy of the formal coud 
order to verify the amount to be paid and then ask the parent or caretaker 
for verification from the absent parent of the actual payment Follow the 
above procedure if the absent parent is noncooperative. 
If the applicable deductions zero out the class member's nonexempt income and 
there are no other Sneede class member in the MFBU, Sneede rules still apply. 
SECTION NO.: 50373 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 2 1 2 DATE: my 10 899 8F-13

[page 46]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
If the MFBU member has income which was used to determine PAlOther PA 
eligibility, the county will allow that portion of the MFBU member's income, which 
was used to determine PA eligibility, as a deduction against that MFBU member's 
income. If the MFBU includes either the stepparent or unmarried partner of an 
Supplemental Security Income (SSI) or In-Home Support Services (IHSS) recipient 
and that MFBU member's income was used to determine SSI or IHSS eligibility, the 
EW will allow that porbon of the MFBU member's income which was used to 
determine PAlOther PA eligibility as a deduction against that MFBU member's 
income. 
Example: The household consists of an unmarried woman and her separate child 
who are both receiving California Works Opportunity and Responsibilrty to Kids 
(CaWORKs) and her mutual child and the child's father who want MedLCal Only. 
The MFBU has a SOC. Since the unmamed woman and her separate child are both 
PA and not in the MFBU, there is no inappropriate deeming as long as the mutual 
child has no incom+property. However, if there is income allocated from the 
CaNVORKs mother to the mutual child which was not used to determine her grant 
amount, Sneede ~les would apply. 
10. MFBU RULES FOR CERTAIN SNEEDE AND NONSNEEDE. CASES 
The following are rules which apply to certain cases regardless of whether or not the case contains 
a Sneede class member. 
A. Excluded Children 
Atthough Section 50381 previously only allowed a child over age two months to be excluded 
from Medi-Cal if hetshe had income or property, Sneede expanded this to include a child of 
any agee(i.e., from one day old to 21 years old but not an unborn) who either (a) refuses to 
provide information about hiier own income or property; w (b) chooses to not receive Medi- 
cal regardless of whether he/she has income or property. 
Counties should note that the exclusion of the only child in a family often resutts in the loss ' 
of linkage for parents who are requesting Medi-Cal. Another disadvantage of excluding a 
child is that the maintenance need is reduced. Now that property is disregarded for children 
in the Percent Program, there should be even less reason to exclude a child. 
It may be more advantageous to treat the eligible child as an "ineligible" member by not 
reporting hirnlher to MEDS (suppress the card), if helshe chooses not to receive Medi-Cal 
but still wants to used for linkage purposes. Even if the child has his own income andor 
property, under the Sneede provis'ins, hisher income or property will not disadvantage the 
other family members; therefore, there may not be much reason to exclude children.. The 
advantages and disadvantages should be explained. 
The county: 
Shall obtain a consent statement (MC 239 SN-3) from the parent or caretaker 
relative whenever a child is excluded from the MFBU; however, if the form is not 
received, the EW should annotate the file but not deny or discontinue the case. 
- 
SECTION NO.: 50373 MANUAL LEITER NO.: 2 1 2 DATE: W 10 S99 8F-14

[page 47]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
Shall (consistent with Section 50558) not apply the excluded child deduction 
(difference in the MNIL with and without the excluded child) when computing the 
SOC under regular Medi-Cal procedures if no information about the excluded child's 
own income is provided. However, when appiying Sneede Procedures, the county 
shall allocate an amount of income and/or property from the parent to the excluded 
child which is equal to the amount allocated to eligible and ineligible children whether 
or not the excluded child refuses to provide information about hidher own property 
or income. 
Shall, when determining the value of unearned and earned in-kind income provided 
by someone outside of the MFBU, not include excluded persons who are not in the 
MFBU. 
The counties will still apply existing regulations which state that: 
The counties will not include the excluded child's income or property in determining 
the MFBU's eligibility or SOC [Seaon 50381 (a)]. 
The maintenance need and properly limit will not include the excluded child 
(Sections 50371,50601,50401). 
The excluded child's medical expenses may be used to meet the MFBU's SOC 
(Section 50657). 
The excluded and ineligible children may mt be used for linkage to the Medi-Cal 
program (Sectron 50205(c). 
B. Treatment of the Stepparent Unit When Only the Separate Child(ren) of One Parent Wants 
Medi-Cal: (See Section 14, No. 10 for an example and the MC 176 W. 1). 
When onty the separate child(ren) of one parent wants Medi-Cal, the MFBU will be 
composed of only the parent and hislher separate children who want Medi-Cal. The 
parent will be an ineligible member of that MFBU. The counties will no longer 
determine if the stepparent has sufiicient income to meet the needs of the stepparent 
unit as previously required by Section 50375. 
To determine eligibiii and SOC for only the separate children of one parent, 
consider only the net nonexempt income and property of the parent (after deducting 
the parental needs allocation from the parent's net nonexempt income and equal 
allocations to hidher spouse and naturauadoptive children) and the net nonexempt 
income and property of the separate children who want Medi-Cal. The name on the 
check rule applies when determining parental income. 
. . If one or more separate children who want Medi-Cal has hislher own inwme or 
property and the MFBU has a SOC or excess property, the county will apply Sneede 
procedures. 
If the parent of the separate children is on public assistance (PAlOther PA), the 
MFBU will consist of only the separate children who want Medi-Cat and only the 
separate children's income and property. 
SECTtON NO.: 50373 MANUAL LE77ER NO.: 12 ) 2 DATE: NAY 1 0 I999 8F-15

[page 48]
MED1-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL; 
When a stepparent is in the MFBU, hislher income and property are counted as part 
of the MFBU's budget computation. Therefore, there is no in-kind income from the 
stepparent to the other members of the MFBU. However, when a stepparent is not 
in the MFBU but is providing a full item of need, the county will determine the value . 
of income in-kind based upon the number of stepchildren in the MFBU. The value 
of the in-kind income is equally prorated to only the stepchildren and is considered 
to be each child's own income. There 1s no in-kind income to a spouse. (See 
Example in the In-Kind Income Section). 
C. Treatment of the Pregnant Minor Mother and Her Unborn Child 
Section 50373(a)(5)(A)(8) requires that the child (including an unborn) of a minor 
mother be included in the second MFBU with the minor mother who is an ineligible 
member, rather than with the minor mother and her parents. This sedon is modified 
to allow an unbom child of a pregnant minor also to be in the same MFBU as the 
minor and her parent(s) or caretaker relative provided that tne parent or caretaker 
relative reports the minor's pregnancy even if there are other children of the pregnant 
minor or the parent of her unborn living in the home. This has the advantage of a 
higher maintenance need level in the parent'(s) MFBU. Note: The county must 
ensure the confidentiality of the minor's pregnancy and not take any action to include 
the unbom in the minor and her parents' MFBU based only on the minor's report of 
. her pregnancy. 
When the pregnant minor is living with he; parent(s), her other children and/or the 
second parent of her unbom (boyfnendlspouse) and all are requesting Medi-Cal, the 
unborn should remain with the pregnant minor in both MFBUs. 
This section does mt affect a minor consent case when the minor mother applies for 
Medi-Cal on behalf of herself and her unborn. 
D. Treatment of the Unborn Child if the Mother is PA or Other PA 
If the pregnant woman is not in the MFBU because she is on PAlOther PA, the 
unbom is in the father's MFBU if the father is living in the home and is in an MFBU. 
After the mutual child is bom, the child will remain in the father's MFBU. If the child 
has income or property of hislher own and there is a SOC or excess property, 
Sneede methodology applies and the child will be in hislher own MBU. 
NOTE: Property of children is disregarded in the Percent programs and Continued 
Eligibility applies until the child reaches age one. The father does continue to 
allocate. 
If neither parent is in an MFBU or there is an unmarried man who is the father 
of the unbom, the unbom is not in the MFBU. 
Example: The household consists of the husband and wife, their mutual child, the 
wife's separate child who is receiving Supplemental Security lncome (SSI) and the 
separate child!s unbom. The MFBU would consist of the husband, wife, and mutual 
child. The separate child's unborn would at be in the MFBU with the minors 
parents because an unbom may only be in an MFBU with & mother andlor father 
(not grandparent(s)). 
- 
SECTION NO.: 50373 MANUAL LEllER NO.: 2 1 2 DATE: yfiy 1 0 8F-16

[page 49]
- - - 
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
- - -- - - 
E. The Unmarried Father of the Unborn Does Not Want Medi-Cal or Fails to Cooperate. 
When the unmarried father of an unborn lives wRh the pregnant woman and does not 
want Medi-Cal or fails to cooperate and there are no other mutual children, then only 
the pregnant woman, her unbom, and her separate children (if any) are in the MFBU. 
The unmarried father need not be added to the MFBU until the unborn attains age 
one because of the Sneede and Continued Eligibiirty rules unless the mother wishes 
to be aided after her 60 day postpartum period and must rely on the father for 
linkage (i.e., unemployed or incapacity). 
11. FEDERAL POVERN LEVEL (FPL) PROGRAMS 
NOTE: These procedures have been wntten to reflect State legislation enacted in September 1997 
which disregards property in all the FPL programs. This is effective March 1, 1998. 
A separate computation is normally required to determine eligibility for a special zero SOC Percent 
program. Due tom, these procedures were revised. The following procedures apply to those 
families meeting the Sneede criteria: 
If the MBU of the pregnant woman, infant or child(ren) does not have a SOC and is property 
eiigible, do not consider them for the special zero SOC programs. 
A separate determination will now be required for each person who is potentially eligible for . 
a special zero SOC program if the MBU has a SOC or is property ineligible. 
Use fJ&l net nonexempt income (nof allocated amounts) of the applicant or beneficiary and 
hidher responsible relative to determine eligibility for the special zero share of cost programs. " 
The county will apply only AFDC-MNIMI deductions and exemptions, and add back any 
health insurance premiums which may have been deducted in the SOC computation as 
usual. 
Wen determining family size, counties shall use the appropriate poverty level amount for the 
total number of persons in the Medi-Cal family budget unit (MFBU). Compare the full net 
income to tbe appropnate poverty IeveUamount 
If the child(ren) are property ineligible and a Sneede determination is required because other 
family members are requesting Medi-Cal, determine if they have a SOC. If so, determine for 
the Percent Programs. If eligible, they may be aided under Ute appropriate Percent program 
as long as they remain eiigible and'the parent(s) remains linked. 
* 
SECTION NO.: 503d MANUAL LEllER NO.: 2 1 2 DA~: MhY 1 0 t939 8F-17

[page 50]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
LACK OF COOPERATION OR LOSS OF CONTACT 
The procedures described in this section apply to all Sneede and non-Sneede cases: 
A deniaVdiscontinuance for noncooperation, etc., may impact only that person and those for 
whom helshe is responsible. Therefore, the county will need to determine which member of 
the MFBU lacks the required information AND determine whether the denialldiscontinuance 
action applies: (1) solely to that person; (2) to that person AND those for whom he/she is 
responsible; or (3) to the entire MFBU. CAUTION: The county will need to verify whether the 
remaining MFBU members are still linked to the program. If not, then they will be 
deniedldiscontinued as Medi-Cal linkage no longer exists. 
Example A: Failure to return a status report affects the entire MFBU; fierefore, the entire 
MFBU must be discontinued if this form is not returned. However, if the parent refuses to 
provide supporting documentation to verify the infonation on the status report, Only the - 
appropriate members of the MFBU should be discontinued. 
Example 8: Unmamed parents file a Medi-Cal application on behalf of themselves, their 
mutual six-month old child and the mother's separate child. The county requests verifcation 
of the unmarried man's separate property, which he refuses to provide. The county will deny 
only the unmamed man as assets are disregarded for the infant and do not affect the mother 
or her separate child. 
An applicantlbeneficiary (other than one in a stepparent case) who is deniedldiscontinued 
for failure to cooperate, etc., (including the family members for whom helshe is responsible) 
will be treated similarly to excluded members of the MFBU. 
The follow rules apply: 
The person's income and property will not be used in determining eligibility or SOC 
for the ernaining persons in the MFBU. 
The person will not be used for linkage. 
The person will not be included in the maintenance need or property limit. 
The person's medical expenses will not be used to meet the MFBU's SOC. 
No excluded child allocation will be deducted in the SOC determination as specified 
in Section 50558; however, hdshe is still included in the responsible relative 
determination and still receives an allocation from a parent 
. The exduded child statement (MC 239 SN-2 or 3) is not required since this is not a 
voluntary request to exciude a child. 
If more than the separate children of the stepparent's spouse want Medi-Cat, and the 
stepparent fails to cooperate, etc., on an issue that affects the other family members that he 
is responsible for including the spouse who is the parent of the separate children, the 
stepparent should be denied or discontinued along with all hislher naturalladopted children. 
However, rather than treating the spouse similar to an excluded or PA person, Wshe should 
be an ineligible member of the MFBU which contains hislher separate children similar to 
* 
SECTION NO.: 50373 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 2 1 2 DATE: MAY 1 0 ?999 SF-18

[page 51]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
when only the spouse's separate children are applying for Medi-Cal. The ineligible spouse 
will receive a $600 parental needs deduction and will then allocate income to hislher separate 
children who want Medi-Cal, the stepparent, and all of hislher own mutual naturaUadopted 
children in the household who are not eligible or who do not wish Medi-Cal. The ineligible 
parent will also equally allocate property to himselflherself and to those for whom helshe is 
responsible. If a SOC or excess property results and one of the separate children has hislher 
own income or property, Sneede rules will apply. 
Example: The family consists of a husband, wife, her two separate children, their mutual 
unbom, and a mutual child. All request Medi-Cal. Assume that the family is property eligible. 
The husband refuses to provide infonation about his income. The county will treat the wife 
as an ineligible parent with her separate children in the MFBU. All other persons should be 
treated similar to excluded persons. Since the husband is not responsible for the wife's two 
separate children, the county will continue to determine eligibility for those children. who are 
the sole remaining potential eligibles in the MFBU. Neither the unbom nor the mutual child 
is included in the MFBU for maintenance need or property limits. Tne $600 Gamma parental 
needs deduction will be deducted from the wife's net nonexempt income. The remainder will 
be allocated equally to her husband, separate, and mutual children. There is no allocation 
to an unbom. The MNlL will be based upon the family size for three persons. If the separate 
children or one separate child had their or hisher own income orproperfy and the MFBU has 
a SOC or excess propem, Sneede procedures will apply. AAfler the baby is bom, the county 
will also allocate the mother's income and property to the excluded newborn. 
If an unmarried father refuses to cooperate and the only child is an unborn, his income and 
properti are disregarded and continue to be disregarded until the infant attains age one. In 
the month following the month of the child's birthday, the county will discontinue the infant if 
verification from the unrnamed parent has still not been received. NOTE: After the 
postpartum period, the unmamed mother will lose her linkage even if the unmarried father 
is unemployed or incapacitated but refuses to cooperate. 
13. IMPACT ON OTHER LAWSUITSIPROGRAMS 
The county should apply the following procedures in this order. 
A. Apply the appropriate regular non-Sneede procedures to the original MFBU. 
B. If there is a SOC or excess property and the MFBU contains a Sneede class member, the 
county will apply Sneede procedures. 
C. AJthough TMC and Four-Month Continuing persons do not have a SOC and are not subject 
to Sneede, if there are members of the MFBU who are treated as ineligible such as those 
receiving Transitional Medi-Cal or Four-Month Continuing Medi-Cal, continue to treat them 
as ineligible under Sneede. 
D. If the MFBU has a Sneede class member and either a SOC or excess property as well as 
a pregnant woman or child who is potentially eligible for a Percentllncome Disregard 
program, apply Sneede procedures before determining eligibility for the Percentllncome 
Disregard programs. See Section 1 1. 
. 
SECTION NO.: 50373 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 2 1 2 -DA-E: YAY101599 8F-19

[page 52]
E. Apply Hunt procedures towards the MBU to meet the SOC. If an MFBU with a me class 
member has a SOC prior to the use of an old unpaid medical bill, .- procedures will 
apply even if the bill would reduce the SOC to zero. The unpaid bill for a responsible relative 
may be used to reduce the SOC of his/her own MBU or the SOC of hidher children's MBU, 
or both as long as the total amount does not exceed the amount of the unpaid bill. A child 
may only use hislher bill to reduce the SOC in hisfher MBU. 
F. If one parent is receiving LTC, the regular Medi-Cal determination is done first. At the time 
of application, if the institutionalized spouse is expected to remain or has remained 
institutionalized for 30 consecutive days, then heishe is in hislher own MFBU. The MFBU 
for the at-home family that is applying for Medi-Cal consists of the community spouse and 
two children. If any of the at-home persons are property ineligible or have a SOC. Sneede 
would then apply, if appropriate. Note: Income allocated to a child at home from a parent in 
LTC is considered a Sneede case. 
, , Exceptions: 
The Qualified Medicare Beneficiary (QMB) program is a two-step program where 
regular MedCCal rules are applied first Sneede methodology should be applied to 
the first step; however, If ineligibility resutts, the county uses 'SSIPicklen 
methodology. If this rkthodology still results in QMB ineligibility, the case should 
be redetermined using Sneede. 
If the parent is receiving CMSP and the Medi-Cal child(ren) had property or a SOC 
or the parent was a stepparent,. Sneede procedures would apply. 
Sneede has no direct impact on Edwards. The Edwards person will be treated as 
an ineligible member of the MFBU. If the MFBU has a Sneede member and a SOC 
or excess property, then the county will apply Sneede procedures. 
. . 
SECTION NO.: 50373 MANUAL LETER NO.: 2 1 2 DA'E WAY 10 8F-20

[page 53]
- - -- 
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
14. EXAMPLES 
I 
EXAMPLE 1: STEPPARENT HOUSEHOLD1 SEPARATE AND MUTUAL CHILDREN W I T H 
PROPERTY 
A stepparent household is comprised of a married couple, the mom's separate child, and the 
couple's mutual child. They all apply for Medi-Cal; the MFBU has excess property. The 
parents own one car, the separate child owns a S700 car, and the mutual child owns a $900 
car. The county exempts the parents' car, which is the most expensive. The MFBU's net 
nonexempt property consists of the following: 
Dad: 53,000 Separate property 
51,000 % community property 
Mom: 51,000 % communrty property 
Separate Child: $700 value of car 
Mutual Child: $900 value of car 
The MFBU's net nonexempt property of $6,600 exceeds the property limit of 53,300 for a 
family of four. The county shall apply the Sneede procedures to determine whether the 
family is property eligible. If any of the family members are determined to be property eligible 
under these procedures, the county will determine whether they have a SOC under the 
non-Sneede rules. If there is a SOC, the county will also determine the SOC under these 
procedures. 
Step 1. Resbonsibie Relative Determination 
-: 1 Dad Mom 
pp - - - - - - 
I 
Oth_errforWhomm I Mom Dad 
ParenffS~ouse & I Mutual Child Mutual Child 
Res~onsible: 1 Separate Child 
I 
I (3) (4) 
Step 2. Pro~ertv Allocation 
$3,000 Separate property 
+1.000 '/1 community property 
$4,000 Total net nonexempt 
Divided by 3 = $1,333.33 each 
Mom - 
S1,000 % communrty property 
Divided by 4 = $250 each 
-- 
- 
SECTlON NO.: 50373 MANUAL LEllER NO.: 2 1 2 DATE: MAY 19 1999 8F-21

[page 54]
MEDI-CAL ELlGIBlLlTY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
Step 3. Each Person's &t Nonexem~t Pro~erty 
Dad - - Mom Mutual Child 
$1,333.33 dad's 31,333.33 from dad 51.333.33 from dad 
i250.00 from mom i250.00 mom's i250.00 from mom 
$1,583.33 net $1,583.33 net +900.00 own 
S2.483.33 net 
Mom's Se~arate Child 
3250 from mom 
+700 own - 
5950 net 
If any of these persons are ineligible due to excess property, the county may need to review the car 
exemption to determine whether eligibility can be established for any of the ineligibie persons. If this 
review results in eligibility for a different famiiy member, the applicant or beneficiary will need to 
indicate which car is to be exempt. 
NOTE: Because property is now disregarded for all children in the Percent Programs, the exemption 
should go to another family member. 
SECTION NO.: 50373 MANUAL Ll3lER NO.: 2 1 2 DATE: A : 8F-22

[page 55]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
EXAMPLE 2: CHILDREN WITH PROPERN (Also see Example 4) 
A married blind couple and their three mutual children apply for Medi-Cal. Each child has a 
savings account of $900 each. The parents have nonexempt property of $1 .loo. ' Their 
combined property of $3.800 exceeds the existing property limit of $3,450 for a family of five. 
The parents will be in a MBU by themselves and each child will be in a separate MBU since 
they each have property of their own. The parents will be given the full property limit for two 
persons (53.000). 
Each of the siblings will be given a prorated property limit based upon the total number of 
persons in the MBU and the number of naturauadoptive parents. The property limit for each 
child is $1 ?O5O (one-third of $3,150 property limit for three). 
Res~onsible Relative Determination 
ParenVSoouse: Husband .- Wrfe 
Others for Whom Wife Husband 
ParenffSoouse Child A Child A 
Resoonsible: Child B Child B 
Child C Child C 
(5) (5) 
Pro~ertv Allocation ' 
Husband - Wife 
$550 % community property $550 % community property 
divided by 5 = $1 1 O'per person divided by 5 = $1 10 per person 
MBU Com~osition: MBU#l MBU#2 MBU#3 MBUM 
Child A Child B Child C Mom & Dad 
Prooertv Limit: MBU#l MBU#2 MBU#3 MBUM 
(Standard property 1l3 of 1M of 113 of full property 
limit for 3 = $3,150 $3,150 $3.1 50 $3,150 limit for lwo 
- $1,050' -$1,050' -$1,050' persons = $3,000 
a child with two parents 
.- 
SECTION NO.: 50373 MANUAL LEIER NO.: 2 1 2 DATE: HAY lo ?999 8F-23

[page 56]
- - - - 
MEDI-CAL ELlGlBlLllY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
Prooertv Determination: 
'MBU #4 
Child A Child B Child C Mom & Dad 
$ 900 own net S 900 own net $ 900 own net S 1 10 mom's share of net 
+110 frommom +A10 frommom +110 frommom+110dad'sshareofnet 
+ 110 fromdad + 110 fromdad + 110 fromdad + llOfrommomtodad 
34.120 net 51.120 net 51.120 net + 110fmmdadtomom , 
- 1,050 limit - 1.050 limit - 1,050 limit S 440 total 
5 70 excess 5 70 excess S 70 excess 5-3,000 limit 
0 excess 
1 > First do the Sneede property determination because all three children are property 
ineligible. Only Mom and Dad are property eligibie. 
2) Next, determine if the family has a SOC under regutar Medi-Cal rules. If the children 
have income of their own, follow Sneede rules for income. If oone of the children 
has income of hisher own, do not appiy 3neede procedures in the SOC 
determination. 
3) Determine whether each child would be eligible for the Percent Program. If the child 
is below age 19, disregard their property and determine whether helshe is income 
eligible. If yes, establish eligibiihy. 
4) If each child is ineigible for the Percent Program, they are also ineligible for regular 
Medi-Cal under the Medically Needy program; however, the couple is still linked to 
the Medi-Cat program because they are blind. 
SECTION NO.: 50373 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 2 1 2 DATE: MAY 1 0 8F-24

[page 57]
-- -- 
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILIW PROCEDURES MANUAL 
.-. -. 
EXAMPLE 3: UNMARRJED COUPLE WITH SEPARATE AND MUTUAL CH~LDREN 
The MFBU consists of the following: 
Unrnamed Man Unmarried Woman 
I I 
Separate Child A Mutual Child Separate Child B 
All apply for MedFCal on May 12tJ1 Both separate children are too old for the Percent 
Programs. 
The MFBU members own property in the following amounts: 
Man - Woman Mutual Ch. Man's S~D. Ch. Woman's S~D. Ch. 
Car 1 $2,000 $2,000 - ORP $7,000 $7,000 
Car 2 $1,500 $1,500 
Car 3 $ 500 $500 
Car 4 $1,500 
' The unmarried couple equally co-own utilized other real property of $14,000. 
Regular Property Determination 
Car 1 is exempt 
$8,000 Excess ORP ($14,000 - $6,000 = $8,000) 
+ 3,000 Car 2 
+ 1,000 Car3 
+ 1 .SO0 Car 4 
$1 3,500 Net nonexempt properly 
. - 3.450 Property limit for five 
$1 0,050 Excess property 
Sneede Prowrtv Determination 
Responsible Relative Determination 1- 
ParentlSwuse: 1 Unmanied Man Unmanied Woman 
1 
Others for Whom the I ---- mutual child mutual child 
ParentlS~ouse $ I separate child A separate child B 
Responsible: 1 (3) (3) 
.. 
I - 
SECTION NO,: 50373 MANUAL LETTrR NO-: 2 1 4 DATE: Aid6 2 4 ?99 
-

[page 58]
. . MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
ii. Each Person's Net Nonexempt Property Determination 
Each person has property and is in a separate MBU. 
Unmarried Man Unmarried Woman Man's Separate Child Woman's Se~arate Child Mutual Child' 
$7.000 ORP $7,000 ORP $1,500.00 % Car 2 $1,500.00 Car 4 Car 3 
- 6.000 Exemption - 6.000 Exemption + 833.00 from dad + 333.33 from mom Exempted by mom 
$1,000 Excess $1,000 Excess ORP $2,333.33 Total net $1,833.33 Total net $833.33 Dad 
-1.500.00 Limit - 1.500.00 - 333.33 Mom 
$ 833.33 Excess $ 333.33 Excess $1,166.66 Totalnet 
Car I exempt Car 1 exempt - -l .050.00 Limit 
(own exemption) by unmarried man S 116.66 Excess 
$1.500 % Car 2 Car 3 exem~t (own exemption) 
$2,500 Total $1,000 Total 
divided by 3 divided by 3 
(self. hi mutual (self, her mutual 
& separate child & separate child) 
= $833.33 to = $333.33 to 
self, his sep. self, her sep. 
& mutual child 8 mutual child 
- 2.000.00 Prop. limit - 2.000.00 Prop. limit 
0 Excess 0 Excess . 
Please note bt m this example, EVERYONE IN THE MFBU IS INELIGIBLE All of the children have excess 
property and the unmanied parents are no longer linked to the program (ineligible children cannot be used 
for linkage). 
This is a case in which tbe county may exempt different cars to establish eligibility (e-g., if Car 4 and Car 2 
are exempt, the unmarried woman, her separate child, the unmarried man and his separate child would be 
eligible). The computation would be as follows: 
* 
SECTION NO,: 50373 MANUAL LFITER NO.: 2 1 4 DATE: El6 2 1 SF-26.

[page 59]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILIN PROCEDURES MANUAL 
Each Person's Net Nonexern~t Pro~ertv Determination 
Unmarried Man Unmarried Woman Man's Separate Child Woman's Separate Child Mutual child ' 
$7.000 ORP $7,000 ORP Car 2 Exempt by dad Car 4 Exempted by mom S 500.00 Car 3 
- 6.000 Exemption - 6.000 Exemption $1.000 From dad S1.166.66 From mom + 1.166.66 Fmm 
$1,000 Excess ORP $1,000 Excess ORP - 1.500 Prop. limit -1.500.00 Prop. irmit + 1.000.00 From dad 
+2.000 Car 1 +2,000 Car 1 0 Excess 0 Excess 52,666.66 Total 
(Car 2 exempt) + 500 Car 3 -1.050.00 Limit 
(own exemption) (Car 4 exempt -own exemption) $1,616.66 Excess 
S3.000 Total $3,500 Total 
divided by 3 divided by 3 
(seff, his mutual (self, her mutual 
& separate children) & separate children) , 
= $1,000 to = $1.166.66 to 
self, mutual child self, mutual child 
& separate child 8 separate child 
- 2.00Q Prop. limit - 2.000 Prop. limit 
0 Excess 0 Excess 
In this example, only the mutual child is ineligible due to excess property and both parents are linked to the 
program because their separate children are eligible. The mutual child is under age 19; therefore, the child 
should be e~l~ated for the Percent Program. If the family income is under the allowable limit, this child would 
be also be eligible for Medi-Cal as property is disregarded. 
SECTION NO.: 50373 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 2 1 2 GATE: MAY 1 0 1399 8F-27

[page 60]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
EXAMPLE 4: UNMARRIED COUPLE WITH MUTUAL CHILDREN - ONE CHILD IS PROPERTY 
INELIGIBLE. 
An unemployed (principal wage earner) pregnant woman lives with her boyfriend and their mutual 
child who is ten months old. The boyfriend has a separate child who, is five years old and has S200 
per month child support In June, the pregnant woman applies for Medi-Cal for the entire family. The 
boyfriend is also father of the unborn child. 
MFBU - Gross Income 
Boyfnend: $1,315 Earned income $2,400 Savings 
Pregnant Mom: 300 UIB $1,200 Savings 
Mutual Unborn NIA NIA 
Mutual Child Under 1 yr. old none 3 25 Savings 
Boyfnend's separate 5 yr. old 200 Child support None 
(5 persons) Total property = S3,625 
Property limit - 3.450 
Excess property 5 175 
Sneede Procedures 
i. Res~onsible Relative Determination for Prowrtv Allocation 
Parenff S~ouse: Ynmamed Man Ynmamed Woman 
Wers for Whom Mutual Child Mutual Child 
The ParentlS~ouse Separate Child 
Is Reswnsible: 
(3) (2) 
Note: The unbom is not listed because there is no allocation to an unbom. 
11. Pro~erhr Allocation - (Do not allocate to unboms) 
unmarried man 
$2,400 - 3 
- 800 each 
unmarried Woman 
$1,200 - 2 
- 600 each 
. - 
SECTION NO.: 50373 MANUAL LElTER NO.: 2 1 2 DATE: yuy 10 8F-28

[page 61]
MEDI-CAL ELiGlBiLlTY PROCEDURES MANUAL . 
... 
III. Net NonexemDt Pro~ertv 
Unmarried Man Unmarried Woman Mutual Child Under 1 
$800 S 600 S 800 from dad 
+ 600 from mom 
+ 25own 
57,425 total 
Unmamed Man's Se~arate Child - 
S 800 from dad (total net) 
iv. MBU and Promrtv Determination 
MBU #I MBU #2 MBU #3 
Unmarried Man Unmarried Woman Mutual Child 
Separate Child Unborn 
S 800 dad's $ 600 net property S 25 own 
+ 800 from dad - 3.000 limit for 2. + 800 from father 
$ 1,600 net property 9 0 excess - + 600 from mother 
- 3.000 limit for 2' $1,425 net property 
S 0 excess - 1.050 limit' 
$ 375 excess property 
*See Sneede Property Limit Chart 
v. Share of Cost Determination 
$1,315 Unmanied man's gross earnings 
- 90 Work deductions 
$1,225 
+ 300 Woman's UIB 
$1,525 . 
+ 150 Net child support for man's separate child 
31,675 Net nonexempt income 
- 1.259 MNIL for 5 
3 416 SOC 
Since there is a SOC under existing regulations, the county will apply Sneede to the 
SOC determination. 
SECnON NO.: 50373 MANUAL LETIER NO.: 2 1 2 DATE: MAY 10 'f939 8F-29

[page 62]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
vi. Income Allocation as Modified by Gamma (DO NOT ALLOCATE TO UNBORNS) 
I 
Unmarried Man Unmarried Woman 
$1,315 Earnings $300 UIB 
- 90 Work deduction - - 600 Less deduction 
$1,225 Net nonexempt S 0 Total to be allocated 
- 600 Lessneedsdeduction (Woman keeps all of her S300 UIB) 
S 625 Total 
Divided by 2 = $312.50 Divided by 1 = $0 
vii. Net Nonexem~t Income 
Unmarried Man ynmarried Man's Unmarried Woman Mutual Child 
Se~arate Child Under 1 
S600 $312.50 From dad $300 $312.50 From dad 
+I 50.00 Net child support + .OO From morn 
$462.50 $312.50 Total 
viii. Mini Budoot Units and Share of Cost Detemination 
Note: Even though the mutual child does not have any income, he is in a separate 
MBU because hi parents are unmarried. 
MBU #1 MBU #2 MBU #3 
Se~arate Child Unmanied Man Ynmanied Woman 
And Unborn 5 Years Old* ' 
$600 $300 $312.50 From dad 
MNIL for 1 - 750 MNlL for 2 $150.00 Own 
$0 $ 0 SOC $462.50 Total 
- 375.00 MNlL 
$87.50 
$88.00 SOC 
MBUll 
Mutual Child under I* 
$312.50 From Dad 
- 312.00 MNIL 
$ .50 = $1 SOC However this child is ineligible due to excess property 
* This child should be evaluated for the Percent Programs because he has a SOC. 
+This child is ineligible due to excess property, but still receives incornelproperty allocation 
from parents. The child should be evaluated for the Percent Programs because property is 
disregarded for those programs. 
SECTION NO.: 50373 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 2 1 2 ;A%: YAY 1 o 899 8F-30

[page 63]
- - 
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
EXAMPLE 5: SPOUSES AND MUTUAL CHILD WITH INCOME 
The MFBU consists of a disabledhusband who receives $710 per month Social Security 
Administration (SSA) disability. benefits, his 50-year old wife who works and earns 5700 per 
month, and their mutual disabled I &year old son attending school who receives S200 per 
month disabled adult child's benefits from his father's SSA record. None are receiving SSI 
benefits; all want Medi-Cal. Assume they are property eligible. 
The county determines the family under regular Medi-Cal procedures as follows: 
Husband's income 571 0 
Disabled child's income - 200 
Gross unearned'income S910 
S20 any income deduction a 
Net unearned income S890 
Since the family has a SOC. 
SneedelGamma procedures apply 
as follows: 
Husband 
Husband's Income $710 
$20 any income deduction 3 
Net nonexempt income $690 
Less needs deduction , - 600 
Remainder to allocate $ 90 
Number of persons for whom 
he is responsible (Mother and 
Child) - 2 
Allocation to each S 45 
W~e's income 
$ 65 eamed income deduction 
Remainder 
% remainder 
Net earned 
Family's net uneamed 
Total net nonexempt 
MNIL for 3 
soc 
W~fe's lncome 
520 any income deduction 
Net nonexempt income 
Earned income deduction 
Remainder 
% the remainder 
Net earned income 
Less needs deduction 
Remainder to allocate 
(Wie keeps $307.50) 
Child - 
Mutual Child's lncome 
Any incorne deduction 
Net nonexempt income 
SECTION NO.: 50373 MANUAL LETIER NO.: 2 1 2 6 mylo I99 8F-31

[page 64]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
MBU #I MBU #2 
(Husband and W&) (Mutual Child) 
Husband's own share S600.00 Child's own share S180.00 
Husband's allocation from wife -00 Allocation from Father 45.00 
W~fe's own share 307.50 Allocation from Mother 0.00 
Wife's allocation from husband B, Total S225.00 
Total 5952.50 Minus MNIL - 312.00 
Minus MNlL for 2 - 934.00 SOC 0.00 
b 18.50 
SOC S 19.00 
I 
SECTION NO.: 50373 MANUAL LElTER NO.: 2 1 2 DATE: a~y 10 399 SF42

[page 65]
MEDi-CAL ELIGIB.ILlTY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
EXAMPLE 6: STEPPARENT HOUSEHOLD WITH MUTUAL AND SEPARATE CHILDREN 
A family of four, (mother, father, their mutual child and the mother's separate child) are receiving 
' Medi-Cal. The mother has unemployment benefits of 5700 per month and father has unemployment 
benefits of $800 per month. The children (ages ! 5 and 16) have no income. Since the family has a 
SOC based on MNlL of Sl,100, Sneede rules (as modified by Gamma) would apply. 
Mother 
Total Countable Income S 700 
Less Needs Deduction - - 600 
Mother's income to be allocated S 100 
Number of persons for whom Mother 
is responsible (Father, mutual child, . , 
and Mom's separate child) 3 
Mother's equal allocation to spouse 
and naturalladopted children $33.34 each 
Father 
Total Countable Income $ 800 
Less Needs Deduaon -600 
Father's income to be allocated $ 200 
Number of persons for whom Father 
is responsible (Mother, mutual child) 2 
Father' s equal allocation to mother 
and naturalladopted children $100 each - 
MBU 81 
(Mother, Father, Mutual Child) 
MBU #2 
(Separate Child) 
Mother's Own Share $600.00 Allocation from Mother $ 3334 
Mother's Allocation from Father 100.00 Total Income 33.34 
Father's Own Share 600.00 Minus MNlL S - 375.00 
Father's Allocation from Mother 33.34 SOC $ 0.00 
Child's Allocation from Mother 33.34 
Child's Allocation from Father + 100.00 
Total $ 1,466.68 
Minus MNIL for 3 - 934.00 
SOC $ 533.00 
NOTE: Mutual.child should be evaluated for the Percent Program. 
- 
SECTION NO.: 50373 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 2 f 2 DATE: MCIY 1 8 8F-33

[page 66]
MEDI-CAL ELlGlBlLlTY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
EXAMPLE 7: CHILD WITH INCOME 
Compute the SOC for a family of hnro (mother and daughter). The mother has unemployment benefits 
of 5350 per month. Daughter (age 17) ~eceives child support of $530 per month. Since the family has 
a SOC based on MNlL of $750, Sneede rules (as modified by Gamma) would apply. 
Mother 
Total Countable Income $350 
Less Needs Deduction - 600 
Mother's income to be allocated S 0 
Number of persons for whom Mother 
is responsible (daughter) 1 
MBU #l 
(Mother) 
MBU #2 
(Child) 
Mother's own share $350 Child's own net nonexempt income 
Total Income $350 after child support deduction 480 
Minus MNIL -600 Total income S 480 
$0 Minus MNIL a 
SOC $105 . 
NOTE: Child should be evaluated for the Percent Program. 
SECTlON NO.: 50373 MANUAL LElTER NO.: 3 1 2 DATE: MY 18 139 8F-34

[page 67]
- - 
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
EXAMPLE 8: STEPPARENT HOUSEHOLD WITH IN-KIND INCOME 
Compute the SOC for a family of three, (mother, spouse. and the mother's separate child) who are 
receiving Medi-Cal. The family receives free housing and food. valued at S450 per month or S150 for . 
each. The mother has unemployment benefits of S700 per month and in-kind valued at ST50 per 
month.' The mother has a health insurance payment of S30 per month. The mother's spouse has 
unemployment benefrts of 5700 per month and in-kind valued at $150 per month. The mother's 
separate child has in-kind valued at $150 per month. Since the family has a SOC based on MNIL of 
$934, Sneede rules (as modified by Gamma) would apply. 
Mother 
Total Countable Income S 850 
Less Heatth Insurance - - 30 
Total Net Countable Income S 820 
Less in-kind income 150 
Less Needs Deduction - - 600 
Mother's income to be allocated S 70 
Number of persons for whom Mother 
is responsible (spouse and daughter) 2 
Mother's allocation to spouse and 
naturaVadoptive children S 35 each 
SDOUS~ 
Total Countable Income S 850 
Less in-kind income 150 
Less Needs Deduction L6e9 
Spouse's income to be allocated S 100 
Number of persons for whom spouse . 
is responsible (wife) 1 
Spouse's allocation to spouse S 100 
MBU #I (Mother and S~ouse) MBU #2 (Seoarate Child) 
Mother's Own Share $ 600 Child's own net nonexempt income $150 
Mother's in-kind income 150 Allocation from mother - 35 
Mother's allocation from spouse 100 Total Income $185 
Spouse's Own Share 600 Minus MNlL - - 375 
Spouse's in-kind income 150 SOC 0 
Spouse's allocation from mother + 35 
Total $1,635 
Minus MNlL for 2 - - 934 
SOC S 701 
SECTION NO.: 50373 MANUAL LETER NO.: 2 1 2 DATE: MAY 1 0 899 8F-35

[page 68]
-- - 
MEDI-CAL ELlGlBlLllY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
EXAMPLE 9: STEPPARENT HOUSEHOLD AND THE PERCENT PROGRAMS 
9 
A family of four, (mother-Jane, father-John, their mutual child-Joy age two years, and the mother's 
separate child-June age 17) are receiving Medi-Cal. The mother has unemployment benefits of S750, 
pays a $50 health insurance premium, for a net nonexempt income of S700 per month. The father has 
unemployment benefits of $800 per month. The children have no income. Since the family has a SOC 
based on MNlL of $1,100, revised Sneede rules (as modified by Gamma) would apply. 
Mother [Jane) Father [John) 
Total countable Income S 700 
Less needs deduction 5 600 
Income to be allocated S 100 
Total countable income $800 
Lessneedsdeduction s,@2Q 
Income to'be allocated $200 
Number of persons for whom Mother Number of persons for whom Father 
is responsible (Father, mutual child, is responsible (Mother, mutual child). 2 
and Mom's separate child) 3 
Mother's equal allocation to spouse Father's equal allocation to mother 
& naturalladopted children $33.34 each & naturalladopted children $100.00 each 
MBU #l MBU #2 
(Jane, John, 'Joy) (June) 
Mother's Own Share $ 600.00 Allocation from Mother 5 33.34 
Jane's allocation from John 100.00 Total Income 33.34 
John's Own Share" -. 600.00 Minus MNlL -375.00 
Allocation from Jane 33.34 SOC $ 0.00 
Joy's allocation from Mother 33.34 
Joy's allocation from Father 1OO.OQ 
Total $1,466.68 
Minus MNlL for 3 - - 934.00 
SOC $ 533.00 
Since Joy is two years old and has a SOC, she is potentially eligible for the 133 percent program. 
Compare only Mom's net nonexempt income ($700) and Dad's net nonexempt income ($800) (total 
of $1,550 after adding back $50 heatth care deductions) to 133 percent of the FPL for a family of four 
to determine Joy's eligibility for the 133 percent program. Joy is eligible for this program. 
SECTION NO.: 50373 MANUAL EIlER NO.: 2 1 2 DATE: wy 1 0 2599 8F-36

[page 69]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
EXAMPLE 10: STEPPARENT HOUSEHOLD WHEN ONLY THE SEPARATE CHILD(REN) OF ONE 
PARENT WISHES MEDI-CAL 
When only the separate child(ren) of one spouse applies for Medi-Cal, the county will use only the 
child(ren)'s own income, if applicable, and the balance of the ineligible parent's income which is 
available to the members of the MFBU. To determine the amount of the ineligible parent's income 
available to the MFBU, i.e., the balance, the county must follow the methodology similar to that 
developed in Sneede even though it is not yet known whether this case will ultimately be a Sneede 
case. That is, the county determines the amount of the ineligible parent's income allocated to the 
nonmembers of the MFBU for whom hdshe is responsible and the remainder is the balance available 
to the MFBU. In making this determination, the ineligible parent is allowed appropriate income 
exemptions and deductions including a parental needs deduction. and then net nonexempt income is 
equally allocated to hislher excluded spouse and all of the ineligible parent's naturalladopted children 
in the household who are both in and out of the MFBU. The amount allocated to the non-MFBU 
members for whom the ineligible parent is responsible is then deducted from the ineligible parent's 
gross income (as are other appropriate deductions and exemptions) to determine the balance of the 
ineligible patent's income available to the MFBU. The county will then determine whether this is a 
Sneede income case. 
Example: Sally wants Medi-Cal for her two separate children, SUS& (age 5) and Shauna (age 4). 
Sally, her husband. Sam, and their mutual child, Steven, do not need Medi-Cal. Sally works and eams 
$1.710 per month; Susie and Shauna have no income of their own. The MFBU is composed of Susie, 
Shauna, and Sally as an ineligible parent. 
Determination of Balance of Mom's Income Available.to the MFBU 
A. Allocation Determination - To determine allocation to family members not in the MFBU. 
$1,710 Mom's gross earnings 
- 90 Work deductions 
$1,620 Net nonexempt income 
- 600 Less needs deduction 
$1,020 Divided by 4 (Sam, Shauna, Susie, Steven) = $255 to each 
$ 510 To Sam and Steven, not in MFBU 
B. Net Balance to MFBU 
$1,710 Mom's gross eamings 
- 3 Work Deduction 
$1,620 
- 510 ($255 allocation to Sam, $255 allocation to Steven) 
$1,100 Net balance available to MFBU from Mom 
-- 
' SECTION NO.: 50373 MANUAL LERER NO.: 2 1 2 DATE: MAY 1 0 1939 8F-37

[page 70]
MEDICAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
MFBU's SOC computation 
$7,110 Mom's income 
0 Shauna's income 
0 Susie's income 
51.1 10 Total net nonexempt income 
- - 934 MNIL for 3 
S 176 SOC 
Since the MFBU has a SOC and the two giris are aged five and four, they are potentially eligible for 
the 133 Percent program. (Note: Sneede is not applicable because the girls do not have income of 
their own. If the girts did have income of their own? &g& procedures would apply before eligibility 
is determined for the FPL programs.) 
133 Percent broaram elioibilitv for each child: 
Shauna Susie 
$1.1 10 Balance of Mom's net income $1,110 Balance of Mom's net income 
0 Shauna's income 0 Susie's Income 
$1,110 TOGI net nonexempt income S1,110 Total net nonexempt income 
$1 ,110 Total net nonexempt income compared to $133 percent FPL for three* = $1,513 (April 1998). 
Therefore, Susie and Shauna are eligible for the 133 Percent programs. 
'In stepparent cases when only the separate children of one of the parents want Medi-Cal, the FPL 
is compared to only the number'of persons in the MFBU and not to the other family members even 
though income was allocated to the other family members. 
If Shauna and Susie each had income-in-kind of $237.50, @&g procedures would apply. NOTE: 
The MFBU's SOC would also be different The MBUs would be as follows: 
MBU #1 MBU #2 MBU #3 
(Mom) (Shauna) (Susie) 
Mom's Own Share $600 Allocation from Mom $255.00 Allocation from Mom $255.00 
MNiL - 000 Shauna's Income 237.50 Susie's Income 237.50 SOC 
$ 0 Total $492.50 Total $492.50 
Minus MNlL - 375.00 Minus MNlL - 375 00 
$117.50 . $1 17.50 
SOC $118.00 SOC $1 18.00 
Compare Shauna's and Mom's total net nonexempt income ($1,110 + $237.50) to the 133 percent 
FPL for three persons ($1,513). Compare Susie's and Sally's total net nonexempt income 
($1,110 + $237.50) to the 133 percent FPL for three persons ($1,513). Both Shauna and Suzie are 
eligible. 
SECTION NO.: 50373 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 2 1 2 DATE: YAY 1 0 8F38

[page 71]
-- 
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
EXAMPLE 11: STEPPARENT HOUSEHOLD - SPOUSE IN LTClBgC 
-Disabled husband is in LTC or B&C and allocates $400 to his wife at home. Wife has S477 net 
earnings. There are four children at home. two mutual children and the wife's separate children. The 
separate children each receive Social Security Income oi 5200 per month. 
Since the family has a SOC, Snoede rules apply: 
MBU #I MBU #2 
Mom 
Mutual Children 
Separate Child A 
MBU #3 
Separate Child B 
MBU #1 
S 877 Total net nonexempt income 
- - 934 MNIL (3) 
S 0 Share of Cost 
S 477 Mom's net nonexempt earnings 
400 LTC allocation from spouse 
-.O Deductions 
$ 877 Net countable income 
- 600 Less needs deduction 
$ 277 Balance 
- 400 LTC allocation from spouse - 
S . 0 Amount allocated to children 
8 8i7 Total amount to MBU #I (Mom keeps) 
$200 Separate child's SSA. income 
I) Allocation from Mom 
$200 Total net income 
$200 Total net nonexempt income 
- 375 Prorated MNlL (1) 
$ 0 Share of Cost 
MBU #3 
$200 Separate child's SSA income $200 Total net nonexempt income 
_O Allocation from Mom -375 Prorated MNlL (1) 
$200 ~otal net income S 0 Share of Cost 
NOTE: If Dad had allocated income to his mutual children, these children would become Sneede class 
members and must be in their own MBU. 
- . - 
SECTION NO.: 30373 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 2 1 2 DATE: MAY 10 !9S 8F-39

[page 72]
MEDI-CAL- ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
EXAMPLE 12: EXCLUDED CHILD CASE - PARENTS PROVIDE INFORMATION ON THE 
EXCLUDED CHILD'S INCOME. 
(1) Household consists of a married couple and their three mutual children: Child A. Child B. and 
Child C. The parents do not wish to file for Child C. Assume the family is property eligible. 
Their monthly income is as follows: 
Husband: $1,500 Gross earnings 
Wife: . S 700 UIB 
Child A: No income 
Child B: S 100 Trust income 
Child C (excluded): $ 59 Interest income 
(a) Reaular Non-Sneede Method 
1) Excluded Child Allocation 
$1,259 MNIL for 5 persons (with the excluded child) 
-1 .lOQ MNlL for 4 persons (without the excluded child) 
$ 159 Difference 
- 59 Child C's own income 
S 100 Excluded child allocation 
. 
2) Share of Cost Com~ulation 
- Net Nonexem~t Income 
$1 ;410 Husband's net earnings ($1,500 less $90 earned income deduction) 
+ 700 Wrfe's UIB 
. . . + 100 Child B's trust income 
$2.21 0 Combined net income 
- 100 Excluded child allocation 
$2,110 Total net nonexempt 
51.100 MNlL for 4 (without the excluded child) 
$1,010 Share of cost 
Since there is a SOC, apply Sneede procedures. 
SEC~ION NO.: 50373 MANUAL LEllER NO.: 2 1 2 ;A*: MkY 10 8F-40

[page 73]
MEDI-CAL ELlGlBlLlTY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
(b) Sneede Method as Modified bv Gamma 
1) Responsible Relative Determination (Include the excluded child) 
ParenVS~ouse Husband - Wife 
Others for Whom Wife Husband 
The ParentlS~ouse Child A Child A 
Is Res~onsible: Child B Child B 
Child C Child C 
Mini Budoet Units Determination 
MBU #I 
Husband 
Wde 
Child A 
(3) 
income Allocation 
MBU $2 
Child B - S 
Husband - W~fe 
$1,500 Gross earnings $700 UIB 
-90 Earned income deduction -600 Less needs deduction 
$1,410 Net earnings $ 100 Total. 
- 60Q Less needs deduction 
$ 810 Total 
divided by 4 = $202.50 per person divided by 4 = $25 per person 
Net Nonexem~t Income for Each Person 
Husband Wrfe Child A 
$600 own $600.00 own 202.50 from Dad 
+ 25 from wife - U02.50 from husband ,-~ from   om 
$625 net $802.50 net 227.50 net 
Child B 
$202.50 from Dad 
+ 25.00 from Mom 
+100.00 own 
$327.50 net 
SECTION NO.: 50373 MANUAL LEllER NO.: 2 1 2 CAE: yu I o S99 8F.41

[page 74]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
5) Share of Cost Determination 
MBU #I 
S 625.00 Husband 
+ 802.50 Wife 
+ 227.50 Child A 
$1,655.00 Net nonexempt 
- 934.00 MNlLfor 3 
S 721.00 SOC 
MBU $2 
S 100.00 Child B's own 
+ 25.00 From Mom 
+202.50 From Dad 
S 327.50 Net nonexempt 
- 312.00 MNlL 
S 15.50 
S 16.00 SOC 
These children should be evaluated for the Percent Programs if they are under age 19. 
SECTlON NO.: 50373 
- 
MANUAL LmER NO.: 2 1 2 DATE: u 10 8F-42

[page 75]
-- 
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
- EXAMPLE 13: EXCLUDED CHILD CASE - PARENTS REFUSE TO PROVlDE JNFORMATlON ON 
THE U(CLUDED CHILD'S INCOME 
A household consist of a married couple and their three mutual children: Child A, Child B, and Child C. 
The parents do not wish to file for Child C and they refuse to provide any information about that child's 
income. Their monthly income is as follows: 
Husband: $1,500 
Wrfe: $ 700 
Child A: 
Child B: $ 100 
Child C (excluded): 
Earnings 
UIB 
No income 
Trust income 
Unknown 
(a) Rwular Non-Sneede Method 
Since the persons refuse to provide any information on the excluded child's income 
and property, do NOT give an income allocation. 
(1) - Share of Cost Determination 
$1,410 Husband's net earnings 
+ 700 Wrfe's UIB 
+ 100 Child B's trust income 
$2,210 Combined net income 
- 0 Excluded child allocation 
$2.21 0 Total net nonexempt income 
-1.1 10 MNlL for 4 persons 
$1,110 SOC 
Since there is a SOC, apply Sneede procedures. 
(b) Sneede Procedures' 
(1) Responsible Relative Determination (Include the Excluded Child) 
ParentISwuse: Husband Wife 
Other for Whom Wife 
The ParenVSmuse Child A 
Is Res~onsible: Child B 
Child C 
(4) 
Husband 
Child A 
Child B 
Child C 
(4) 
SECTION NO.: 50373 MANUAL LElTER NO.: 2 1 4 DATE:

[page 76]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILtN PROCEDURES MANUAL . - --. 
' (2) Mini Budoet Units Determination 
MBU #1 
Husband 
Wife 
Child A 
MBU #2 
Child B 
(3) Income Allocation 
Husband Wrfe 
$1,500 Gross earnings $700 UIB 
- 90 Earned income deduction - 600 Less needs deduction 
$1,410 Net earnings $100 Total 
- 600 Less needs deduction 
$ 810 Total 
Divided by 4 = $202 per person Divided by 4 = $25 per person 
(4) Net Nonexem~t income for Each Person 
-*. 
Husband Wife - Child A 
$600.00 Own $600.00 Own $202.50 From Dad 
+ 25.00 From wife $202.50 From husband + 25.00 From Mom 
$625.00 Net $802.50 Net $227.50 Net 
Child B 
$202.50 From Dad 
+ 25.00 From Mom 
+100.00 Own 
$327.50 Net 
(5) Share of Cost Determination 
MBU #I MBU #2 
$ 625.00 Husband $100.00 Child B's own 
+ 802.50 Wife + 25.00 From Mom 
+ 227.50 Child A +202.50- From Dad 
$1,655.00 Net nonexempt $327.50 Net nonexempt 
- 934.00 MNIL for 3 -312.00 MNlL 
$ 721.00 SOC $ 15.50 
$ 16.00 SOC 
The Sneede determination is the same as the previous example when information 
is provided on the excluded child. 
SECTlON NO,: 50373 MANUAL LFITER NO.: 2 1 4 DATE: e6 2 4 199s 8~-44

[page 77]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
EXAMPLE 14: STEPPARENT HOUSEHOLD WlTH PREGNANT MINOR AND HER BOYFRIEND 
- NOT A MINOR CONSENT CASE 
(If the pregnant minor's boyfriend (and father of the unbornj is not in the home. ignore the second 
MFBU described below). 
A stepparent household consists of the manied couple. the wife's separate unmarried pregnant minor. 
the minor's unborn child, the minor's unemployed 22-year old boyfnend (also father of the unbom). and 
the husband's separate 10-year old child. The entire household applies for Medi-Cal and the mother 
reports her daughter's pregnancy. 
There are two MFBUs. The first MFBU consists of five persons: stepfather. mother, minor mother, the 
unbom, and the husband's separate 10-year old child. 
MFBU $1 
stepfather 
mother 
pregnant minor (mother's separate child) 
stepfather's separate 10-year old 
pregnant minor's unbom 
If the boyfnend (or other children) of the pregnant minor are also living in the home: 
The second MFBU would consist of the ine[igible pregnant minor, her unbom, and the eligible 
boyfriend (and father of the unbom) and any other children of the minor. 
(ineligible pregnant minor) 
unbom 
boyfriend (father of the unborn) 
any other children of pregnant minor if applicable 
Monthhr Income: 
$900 Stepparent's VA compensation 
$825 Wrfe's, UI B 
$300 Wrfe's income from a trust 
$300 Pregnant minor's support payments from an absent parent 
$200 1 0-year old's SSA from deceased mother 
They do not have any property; assume MFBU #1 has a SOC under existing regulations. 
SECTION NO.: 50373 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 2 1 2 DATE: MAY 10 1933 8F45

[page 78]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
Sneede Procedures 
I. Res~onsible Relative Determination for Income Allocation 
ParenVS~ouse: Ste~~arent - Wife 
Qthers for Whom W~fe Husband 
The ParentlSoouse 10-year old child Pregnant Minor 
Is: (2) (2) 
11. Income Allocation (DO NOT ALLOCATE TO UNBORNSJ 
Steooarent Wife 
$900 VA Compensation $1.125 Income 
- 600 Less needs deduction 600 Less needs deduction 
$300 Total S 525 
divided by 2 = $150 divided by 2 = 5262.50 
. iii. Net Nonexem~t Income 
Steo~arent - Wife Preonant Minor Ste~~arenfs 
Se~arate Child 
$600.00 Needs $600 Needs $300.00 Support $200 SSA 
+262.50 From wife + 150 From husband - 50.00 Deduction + 150 From Dad 
$337.50 Net $750 Net $250.00 Net $300 Net 
+ 762.5Q From mom 
$512.50 Net 
iv. MRUs and Share of Cost Determinations 
MBU #1 hm!u2 !!mJB 
Ste~oarent & Wife Preanant Minor Ste~~arent's Seoarate 
fiu!km Child 
$ 600 Husband 8 512.50 Net 3 300 Net 
+ 600 Wife - - 623.00 MNIL for 2' - 375 MNlL of 1' 
$1,200 Total net $ -00 SOC $ 0 SOC 
- 934 MNILfor2' 
$ 266 SOC 
'See Sneede MNIL chart. This is the amount for 2 children with 1 parent 
- 
SECTION NO.: 50373 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 2 1 2 DATE. MAY 10 8F46

[page 79]
-- - 
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILIN PROCEDURES MANUAL 
- 
MFBU g2 
Existina Method to Com~ute SOC: 
S 250 Pregnant minois full net nonexempt income 
+ 300 Boyfriend's UIB 
5 550 Total net nonexempt income 
- 934 MNlL for family of 3 (boyfriend, pregnant minor and unborn) 
0 soc 
Since MFBU $2 has zero SOC, do not apply Sneede procedures. 
.- # 
SECTION NO.: 50373 MANUAL LEnrR NO.: 2 1 2 DATE: MAY 1 0 l999 SF47

[page 81]
- -- 
MEDI-CAL ELIGlBlLfTY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
EXAMPLE f5: STEPPARENT HOUSEHOLD WITH MINOR MOTHER, MINOR MOTHER'S BABY, 
AND MINOR MOTHER'S BOYFRIEND 
(If the minor mother's boyfriend (and father of the minor mother's newborn) is not living in the home, 
ignore the boyfriend in MFBU #2.) 
This is the same household as in Example 14 but now the minor has deliwered the infant A stepparent 
household consists of the married couple, the wife's separate teenage daughter (minor mother), the 
minor mother's one-month old infant, the minor mother's boyfriend and father of the infant, and the 
stepparent's separate I 7-year old child. 
The MFBU compositions are: 
stepparent $ 900 VA Comp. 
wife $1,125 UIB & trust 
minor mother $ 300 support 
1 1-year old child$ 200 SSA 
<minor mother> (Ineligible in this MFBU) 
minor mother's infant 
boyfriend 
Cornoutations for MFBU #I 
Sneede Procedures 
I. Reswnsible Relative Determination for Income Allocation 
Others for Whom Wrfe Husband 
The ParentlS~ouse 1 l-year old child Minor Mother 
Is Res~onsible: (2) 12) 
11. Income Allocation 
Ste~~arent - Wife 
$900 VA wmp $1,125 Income 
-600 Less needs deduction - - 600 Less needs deduction 
$300 Total $ 525 
divided by 2 = $1 50 divided by 2 = $262.50 
SECTION NO.: 50373 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 2 1 4 DATE: && 2 4 & SF-48

[page 82]
* 
. . 
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL . - 
iii. Net Nonexem~t Income 
Husband Wffe Minor Mother Ste~oarent's 
Se~arate Child 
$600.00 Husband's $600.00 Wife's $300.00 Support $200 SSA 
+ 262.50 From wife + 150.00 From husband - 50.00 Deduction - Fmdad 
$862.50 Net $750.00 Net $250.00 $350 Net 
+ 262.50 From mom 
$512.50 Net 
iv: MBUs and Share of Cost Determinations 
MBU #1 MBU #2 MBU #3 
Husband & W~fe Minor Mother Husband's Seoarate 
Child - 
$ 862.50 Husband's net $512.50 Net $350 Net -. -, 
+ 750.00 Wife's net - 375.00 MNIL for 1' - 375 MNlt for 1' 
$1 612.50 Total net $137.50 $ 0 SOC 
- 934.00 MNIL for 2* $138 SOC" 
$ 678.50 
$ 679.00 SOC 
'See Sneede MNIL chart 
" Minor Mother is eligible for 60 Day Postpartum Program 
COMPUTATIONS FOR MFBU #2 
MFBU composition: <minor mot he^ 
infant under one year old 
boyfriend (father of the unborn) 
Follow the same procedures as in Example 4 Unrnamed Couple with Mutual Children. However, in 
this MFBU, the minor mother is not eligible although she will be iisted as a responsible relative for her 
child's medical expenses and any of her medical expenses not covered by Md-Cal may be used to 
meet her baby's SOC. Evaluate the infant under the income Disregard program if there is a SOC for 
the infant 
3 
SECTION NO.: 50373 MANUAL LElTER NO.: 2 1 4 DATE: sf& 2 4 L. SF-49

[page 83]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
EXAMPLE $16: MARRIED COUPLE WITH MUTUAL CHILDREN; UNMARRIED PREGNANT 
MINOR AND FATHER OF THE UNBORN LIVE WITH MINOR'S PARENTS AND FILING FOR 
MINOR CONSENT SERVICES 
A pregnant minor lives wrth her naturaVadoptive parents. her full siblings. and her boyfriend. The minor 
and her minor boyfriend file for minor consent services (no one else in the family needs Medi-Cal). 
The minor has no income and the minor boyfriend has earned income of S1.500 per month: their 
property is under the limit for a family of three. 
The MFBU composition is as follows: boyfriend 
pregnant minor 
unbom 
Existino Method to Com~ute SOC: 
$1,500 Eamed income 
- 90 Eamed income deduction 
$1,410 Net earned income 
- 934 MNlLforthree 
3 476 SOC 
a. Sneede Resoonsible Relative Determination 
ParenVS~ouse Ynmarried Preonant Minor Father of the Unborn 
Others for Whom none 
The ParentlSvouse 
Is Res~onsible: 
none 
The unbom is not listed since there is no allocation to an unbom. Each minor is 
responsible only to himlhersetf since parental income and property are not considered 
under the Minor Consent Services program and be-cause the minors are unmarried. 
b. Income Allocation 
There is no income allocation determination for the same reason cited in subsection 
a above. Each minor's income is considered only in hislher own MBU. 
SECTION NO.: 50373 MANUAL tETTER NO.: 2 1 2 DATE: MAY 10 8F-50

[page 85]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
c. MBU and Share of Cost Determination 
MBU g1 
Pregnant Minor Mother & Unborn 
MBU $2 
Father of the Unborn 
S 0 net nonexempt income 
- 750 MNlL for 2 
S 0 Share of cost 
S1.500 Earned income 
- 90 Earned income deduction 
S1,410 Net earned income 
600 MNlL for I 
S 810 SOC 
After the babv is born, the MFBU is similar to a regular minor moth,er case (composed 
of the unmarried minor mother with her parents in one MFBU and the unmarried 
minor mother as an ~neligible member in the second MFBU wN, the unmarried father. 
and the infant. 
Second MFBU 
MBU #1 MBU *2 - MBU #3 
Unmarried Minor Mother (IE) Infant Unmamed father 
$0 SOC $810 $600 Own income 
- 312 MNlL - MNIL 
W88 SOC $ 0 SOC 
The infant. would be eligible for the Income Disregard program because higher 
eligibility is tied to the mother and because of Continued Eligibility, no raise in income 
can occur until helshe is age one. 
t 
I 
SECnON NO.: 50373 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 2 1 2 DATE: MAY 10 8F-51

[page 86]
-- 
' MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILlTY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
EXAMPLE 17: PAIOTHER PA PERSON IN HOUSEHOLD & OTHER FAMILY MEMBERS APPLY 
FOR MEDI-CAL 
A household consist of a married couple, their mutual child. and the wife's separate child. The 
husband is receiving SSI and Social Security disabilrty benefits. The wife and mutual child receive 
Social Security benefits from the husband, and the wife's separate child receives child support 
payments. Both of the children are over six years old and neither are blind nor disabled. The wife and 
children apply for Medi-Cal. Assume that the MFBU property does not exceed the allowable limits for 
a family of three. 
The income is as follows: 
[Husband (Mario Martinez): $600 SSA, S12 SSI] 
Wrfe: (Maria Martinez): $300 SSA, $275 UIB 
Mutual Child (Manny): $300 SSA 
Wrfe's Sep. Child (Marta): WOO Child Support 
The MFBU has a SOC under existing regulations: 
51,275 Total countable income 
- 38 Income used to determine PA eligibility (see MC 175-6) 
$1,237 Total net nonexempt income 
- 9 MNlL for family of 3 
$ 303 Share of Cost 
I. Sneede Resmnsible Relative Determination 
ii. 
Qthers for Whom 
The ParenVSmuse 
Is Res~onsible: 
income Allocation from Maria 
Separate Child 
Mutual Child 
$300 SSA 
.+275 - UIB 
$575 Total gross nonexempt income 
- 38 Income used to determine PA eiigibilrty - 
$537 Total net nonexempt income 
-600 Less needs deduction 
S 0 Allocation to Manny and Marta 
- -- 
SECTION NO.: 50373 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 2 1 5. DATE: BAY 1 0 8F-52

[page 87]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
... 
111. Each Person's Net Nonexemot fncome 
Maria 
S600 own 
Mannie Marta 
S 0 Frommom S 0 Fr~mrnom 
300 Own SSA +350 Net child support 
S300 Total net 5350 Total net 
iv. MBU and Share of Cost Determination 
MBU #I MBU #2 
Maria $600 Net Mannie S300 Net 
-600 MNIL - (mutual -375 MNIL* - 
0 Share of cost child) S 0 Share of cost 
Marta 15350 Net 
(sep. -375 MNIL 
child) f 0 Share of cost 
.'Do not count the SSI father when determining MNIL or property limits for naturalfadopted 
child because he is not in the MFBU. 
- 
SECTION NO.: 50373 MANUAL LElER NO.: 2 1 2 DATE: my 1 0 B9S 8F-53

[page 88]
MEDI-CAL ELlGlBlLITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
EXAMPLE 18: MARRIED MINOR CHILD LIVING IN THE HOME OF THE PARENT(S) 
Overview 
MFBU #I 
The first MFBU contains all the family members of the minor living in the home, i.e., the married minor's 
parents or stepparent, siblings, married minor's children, and the married minor's spouse. All are 
ineligible except the married minor. As always, all income of these persons are counted. Although all 
the family's income is counted, they would receive the benefit of a large maintenance need level. . 
There is no in-kind income between persons in the same MFBU. This MFBU would be subject to the 
modified SneedelGamrna ~les if the MFBU met the criteria of inappropriate deming to the eligible 
minor child and this causes himiher to have a share of cost (SOC). 
Modified Sneede: Sneede prohibit inappropriate deeming. However, current Sneede rules must be 
modified to address this MFBU since current Sneede rules would be contradictory if applied to this 
situation. For example, current Sneede rules specify that a married couple be together in an MBU 
(ex-minor child and spouse). Sneede also specifies that a child without income stay in the MBU with 
the parent(s) if there is no stepparent Yet, the minor's parent(s) and minor's spouse have financial 
responsibilrty. Since only property ineligibilrty or share of cost in this MFBU impacts the minor, we will 
prohibit inappropriate deeming by disregarding any incometproperty iri this MBU except from the 
married minor child, the married minor child's parent(s) or married minor child's spouse. 
This will be inustrated in the Examples in Item 6. 
MFBU #2 
The second MFBU contains the married minor's spouse, the married minor's children, and the rnamed 
minor as ineligible if the spouse and children wish to apply. The married minor's income is counted 
again which is similar to the treatment of the unmarried minor in Number 9. This MFBU would be 
subject to SneedelGamma rules if one of the children had income, or the minor or the spouse is a 
stepparent 
MFBU #3 
The third MFBU contains the married minor's parent(s) and/or parent's spouse, siblings, and the 
rnamed minor as an ineligible member if the minor's parent and/or spouse and their children (siblings 
to the married minor) wish to be aided. The same SneedeIGarnrna rules apply here as well. 
- - - - - -- - 
- 
SECTION NO.: 50373 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 2 1 2 DATE: MAY 10 8F-54

[page 89]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
A No Inappropriate Deeming 
Mary is an 1 &year-old pregnant mamed minor parent She has no income. She iiies with 
her parents, her ?&year-old sister, her spouse and their two mutual children. The children 
and sister have no income. Her spouse works part-time (under 100 hours) and eams $500 
inwme per month. The minor's parents work ful! time. The minor's mother eams $1,000 net 
nonexempt income per month and the father eams $1,500 net nonexempt income. The 
family is property eligible. Since Mary is not deprived, she must be eligible as a Medically 
Indigent person under 21 or under the Percent programs. The parents are not eligible 
because they are not aged, blind, disabled, etc. Mary's spouse and children are evaluated 
under the Medicalty Needy program because of unemployed parent deprivation. The family 
pays no heatth insurance premiums. 
MFBU #I (a) MFBU #2 (b) MFBU #3 (c) 
Mary [Mary] ineligible (IE) [Mary] IE -,. 
[Mary's parents] IE Mary's spouse [Mary's parents] ineligible 
[Mary's spouse] IE Mary's 2 mutual children Mary's sister 
[Mary's 2 mutual children] IE Mary's unborn Mary's unborn 
[Mary's sister] IE 
Mary's unborn 
Total net income = $3,000 Total net income = $500 Total net income = $2,500 
MNlL for 8 = $1.692 MNIL for 5 = $1,259 MNlL for 5 = $1,259 
Mary's SOC = $1,308 Spouse Z4 Children Sister's SOC = $7,241 
have no SOC 
Evaluate Mary for the 200% Evaluate Sister for 100% 
Prbgram for 8 = $4,609' Program for 5 = $1,605' 
Mary is eligible. Sister is not eligible. 
* 1998 Federal Poverty Level 
B. Inappropriate Deeming Applies 
Same scenario above except Mary has $100 per month net nonexempt incorne, the two 
children of Mary's spouse are his separate children and Mary's sister has net nonexempt 
income of $50 per month. 
SECTlON NO.: 50373 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 2 1 4 DATE: $JG 2 4 'lls=$ 8~-55

[page 90]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
MFBU (a) MFBU (b) MFBU (c) 
Mary [Mary1 [Mary1 IE 
[Mary's parents] IE Mary's spouse [Mary's parents] IE (no linkage) 
[Mary's spouse] IE Spouse's separate children Mary's sister 
[Spouse's separate children] 1E Mary's unborn Mary's unborn 
[Mary's sister] IE 
Mary's unborn 
Total net income = $3,150 Total net income = $ 600 Total net income = $2,650 
MNlL for 8 = - $1.692 MNlL for 5 = - $1.259 MNIL for 5 = - $1 -259 
Mary's SOC = $1,458 Spouse 8 Children 0 Sister's SOC = $1,391 
have no SOC 
MFBU #1 
In the first MFBU, the only eligible person is Mary. The onty inappropriate deeming which affects Mary 
is the income from Mary's sister (a child with income). Rather than set up the usual Mini Budget Um,s 
for all the various persons in this MFBU, for ease of administration, counties should disregard any 
income/property from persons who are not responsible for the one eligible married minor person in 
this MFBU. In this case, Mary's sister is not responsible for Mary; therefore, her $50 will be disregard. 
The remaining income will be compared to the regular MNIL for the entire family including Mary's 
sister. If there is a SOC, evaluate for the Percent Programs, if applicable. Compare the same amount 
(without Mary's sister's income) to the appropriate Federal Poverty Level for eight 
MFBU 
Mary $ 100 
[Mary's parents) 1E. $2,500 
[M5ry1s spouse) IE S 500 
(Spouse's separate children] IE 0 
Mary's unborn 0 
Mary's sister's income ($50) Uncounted 
Total income = $3,100 
Compare MNlL Chart for 8 = 1.692 
Mary has a SOC of $1,408 
Evaluate Mary for the 200% 
FPL program for 8 = $4,609 
Mary is eligible. 
SECTION NO.: 50373 MANUAL LRTER NO.: 2 1 4 DATE: b2G 2 4 =3j 8~36

[page 91]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILIN PROCEDURES MANUAL 
MFBU %2 
The second MFBU contains Mary as an ineligible peison. he; spouse an3 his childr~n. Foiio~ the 
regular siegparznt household rules unless only :he zhildrer! wish ro tpgiy: Assume :.'is spouso's 
separate children wish to apply. Firsi datermine now nuch cf:h~ spozse's icccme !s ai!c:ate5 ;c Utry 
and the sepa:zrr children to see now much of :he spouse's income !s ir! tn~ MFBU. Since the spouse 
has less than tne S600 parental needs allowance. nothing is allozaied Thl entire SSOO is zvailab!e 
to the MFBU. li there were a remainder. this wouid be divided by the nurn3er of person tht: the 
spouse was responsible = three (Mary and his two childrenj. 
MFBU 
(Spouse) lE S500 
Spouse's separate children 
Total S500 
Net balance to the MFBU = S500 
Compare to MNlL for 3 = - S934 
SOC for separate children = S 0 
If the spouse wishes Medi-Cal, follow the regular SneedeIGarnma methodology for a stepparent 
household when all the persons in the household wish Medi-Cal. 
MBU #1 MBUX2 
(Mary) 1E . 
Spouse 
Mary's unbom 
Spouse's Separate Children 
Mary will not allocate any Income to the spouse's separate children. 
MFBU #3 
The third MFBU contajns Mary as ineligible, Mary's unborn, Mary's ineligible parents (no linkage), and 
Mary's sister. Regular ~needekamrna rules apply because this MFBU has a SOC and the MFBU has 
two children with income. Mary and Mary's sister. 
(Mary) IE ' S 100 
Mary's unbom 
(Mary's parents) IE $2,500 
Mary's sister u 
Total Nonexempt income 52,650 
Compared to MNlL for 5 = 51.259 
SOC S1.391 
-- 
SECTION NO.: 50373 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 2 1 2 DATE: MAY~~= 8F-57

[page 92]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
MBU $1 MBUZ2 . MBU $3 
(Mary's parents) IE (Mary) lE 
Mary's unbrn 
Mary's sister 
Each parent is responsible for their spouse, Mary. and Mary's sister. Ezch may kesp S500 for their 
own share and allocate the remainder divided by three. 
Mary's Mother: S400 - 3 = 51 33 to Father. Mary. and Mary's sister 
Mary's Father: S903 - 3 = S300 to Mother. Mary. and Mary's sister . 
Since there are no eligible persons In MBU $2 and no money allocated. this MBU will not be discussed. 
MBU $1 MBU $3 
Mother's own share = S600 Mary's sister's income = $ 50 
Mother's share from Father = S300 Allocation from Mother = $1 33 
Father's own share = S600 - Allocation from Father = 
Father's share from Mother = $133 Total S483 
Compare to MBU Chart = 312 
SOC S171 
Mary's sister is under age 19: therefore, she shoutd be evaluated for the 100 percent program. The 
total of the net nonexempt income of both parents = $2,500 and her income of $50 = $2.550. 
Compare this to the FPL for five = $1 505. Mary's sister is not eligible for the FPL program. 
SECTION NO.: 50373 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 2 1 2 DATE: MAY 1 0 1999 8F-58

[page 93]
-- - -- - - - - 
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL- 
15. CHARTS, FORMS, and NOTICES OF ACTION 
A. Charts 
1. Maintenance Need Income Levels and Property Limit Chart 
2. MFBU/MBU Reference Chart 
3. Processing Flow Chart 
B. Forms 
MC 175-1 (5198) lncome Screening Questions 
MC 175-P (10191) Property Screening Questions 
MC 176-P (1196) Property Reserve Work Sheet 
MC 175-2 (9197) Responsible Relative Determination 
MC 175-353 (111 8/91) Sneede Property Worksheet 
MC 175-31 (1 1197) Net Nonexempt lncome Determination 
MC 175-31.1 (9197) Net Nonexempt lncome Determination - Continuation Sheet 
MC 175-4 (5198) Mini Budget Units and Share of CostlProperty Determinations 
MC 175-5 (5198) Federal Poverty Level (Percent) Programs 
MC 175-6 (5198) Allocation form SSI or IHSS Person (Includes Pickle Person) 
MC 1757 (6197) Allocation Worksheet for Board & Care Person to Spouse & Children 
MC 176 W.l (5197) Stepparent Computation When Only the Spouse's Separate 
Children Apply 
C. Notices of Action 
1. MC 239-SN3 (222l91) Excluded Child Statement 
2. MC 239-SN3 (2/22/91) Excluded Child Statement (Spanish) 
3. MC 239 SN4 (5198) Approval for Benefits or Change in Share of Cost 
4. MC 239 SN4 (5198) Approval for Benefits or Change in Share of Cost (Spanish) 
5. MC 239 SN-5 (3198) Denial or Discontinuance of Benefits Due to Excess Property 
6. MC 239 SN-5 (3198) Denial or Discontinuance of Benefits Due to Excess Property 
(Spanish) 
SECTION NO.: 50373 MANUAL LRTER NO.: 225 DATE: 9/6/00 20008~-59

[page 94]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
Maintenance Need Income Levels (MNIL) Determinations: Sneede v. Kizer 
Prorated MNIL Income Standard and Property Levels 
Single Parent 
Single Parent with Unborn 
Married Couple -Two Adults 
Married Couple with Unborn 
Unmarried Couple - Each Unmarried Partner 
Person Type 
Allow the full non-Sneede MNIL incomefproperty limits for the MBU based on the number of individuals 
in the MBU. 
Each MBU receives full non-Sneede MNIL income/property limit based on the number of persons in each 
MBU. If there is a wegnant minor in the MFBU, include the unborn in the Dregnant minor's MBU. 
MNIL Income Property 
"NOTE: Add S1l for each additional child after 10 to MNIL income standards to determine prorated income standards. 
No. Children in MBU X MKIL Income Standard for = Prorated income 
Parent(s) +No. Children in MBU Parent(s) - Child(ren) in MBU 
No. of Children 
in MBU 
SECTION NO.: 50373 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 225 DATE: 9/6/00 8F-60 
One Parent 
Prorated income I Prorated Property 
Two Parents 
Prorated Income / Prorated Property

[page 95]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
SNEEDE MFBUiMBU REFERENCE CHART 
When onlv the separate children of one spouse want Medi-Cal-aIIocate oniy the naturavadoptive 
parent's income and property to: all of the spouse's naturaVadoptive children (even the excluded 
children), the stepparen6 and the ineligible naturaYadoptive parent. Do a allocate income or property 
to an unborn child. Do a include the p-arent's unborn child in the MNIL and property limits. 
ITEM 
Property and lnwme Counted 
Included in Maintenance Need/ 
Properly Limit 
1 If PNOther PA person is on Four-Month Continuing or TMC, treat this person as an 
ineligible member of the MFBU. 
2 Medi-Cal will count hisher income not used by the PAIOther PA programs. 
PERSON TYPE 
.. 
3 
Allocate income or property when Sneede applies. 
Unborn 
N/A 
YES 
4 Note: First allocate only income (based on the difference in the MNIL with and without 
the excluded child less than the child's own income) if parent provides information on 
excluded child's income for MFBU's SOC determination. 
Medical Expenses Used to Meet 
Share of Cost 
Receive Medi-Cal Only 
Used to Determine Linkage to Aid 
to Families with Dependent 
Children 
- - - - - - - 
SECnON NO.: 50373 MANUAL LmER NO.: 2 1 4 DATE: 2s 2 4 893 8F-61 
Eligible 
YES 
YES 
YES 
YES 
YES 
N/A 
NO 
YES 
Excluded 
NO 
NO 
NO 
NO 
NO 
Sneede Allocation of Parental 
Income or Property to 
NaturaUAdopted Child 
YES4 NO I YEP 
Ineligible 
YES 
YES 
YES 
NO 
NO 
PA/ 
Other PA1 
NO-' 
NO 
NO 
NO - 
YES 
-- 
YES NO

[page 96]
MEDI-CAL ELJGIBJLITY PROCEDURES MANUAL - .. 
Section 1931(b) Detenninadous: Sneede v. Kiur 
Pronted Income Standard md Property Levels 
NOTE: ~dd S14 for each additional person over 10 to determine 
higher Income Standards- 
smba 
of 
Children 
Srnaba 
m 
mu 
1 
2 
3 
SECTION NO.: 50373 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 2 1 4 DATE: 2 4 7993 8F-62 
One Parent 
illcoms 
Standard 
614 
774 
920 
-- 7 760 4 I 1.049 ' 
1 
840 
hratd 
lmoarcSU 
PfDra'Li 
-%J=F 
3.00(! 
3215 
984 5 
- - : 12 
517 
690 
1.180 
!.SW I 1 
2.100 
2475 
6 I 12% 
7 
1-1 11 
1.412 1236 
1361 
1.4% 
8 r I531 
9 1.662 
10 I 1.676 
3.3i5 
f .6OG 
3.780 
I524 3.819

[page 97]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
SNEEDE V. KlZER 
INCOME SCREENING QUESTIONS 
If the MFBU has a share of cost and includes child(ren), complete the following: 
3 NewarmWnon 3 RedetetmiMtion 3 change D Retroaawe eI1gb7ny 3 ~onwi 
DOES THE MFBU INCLUDE: 
3 Yes D No a A stepparent? 
3 Yes 3 No b. An unmarried couple with mutual child(ren)? 
3 Yes 3 No c. A child with hisher own nonexempt income (induding unearned in-kind income provided by 
someone outside of the MF3U) and there are other persons in the MFBU? 
3 Yes 3 No d. A nonparent caretaker relative in the same MFBU with the child(ren) for whom care is provided 
and the caretaker wants Medial? 
If 'Now to ail of the above, determine if eiigibiti exists for pregnant woman or infam under 1 (Income Disregard Program), child 
under 6 (133 percent), or child, age 6 through 18 (100 percent). 
If "Yeses to any of the above and: 
1. the MFBU includes a paren; complete MC 1752, MC 175-31, and MC 175-4. 
2. ' the MFBU does not include a parent complete MC 175-31 and MC 1754. 
-- 
SECTION NO.: 50373 
-- 
MANUAL LETTER NO.: 2 1 2 DATE: MAY 1 0 199 8F-63

[page 98]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
SNEEDE V. KlZER 
PROPERTY SCREENING QUESTIONS 
If the MFBU has excess property and includes child(rcri), complete the followinp: 
- 
DOES THE MFBU INCLUDE: YPj I 
a Asreppartru? 
I 
b. An unmarried couple wub mud childrut? I 1 
(1) tht MFBU hdu& a pam~ complut MC 175-2 MC 175-3P. and MC 1754. _ 
(2) the MFBU doa nor induck a partnt ampiae MC 175-3P& MC 1754. 
SECTION NO.: 50373 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 2 1 2 GATE: UY 10 8F-64

[page 99]
MEDI-CAL ELlGIBlLITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
samd-m='-*04 
PROPERM RESERVE WORK SHEET 
Name Case Number Month 
YC :'JSP wr 35. pb X:X 
w 
SECTION NO.: 50373 NlANUAL LEl7ER NO.: 2 1 2 DATE: mlY 1 0 I999 8F-65

[page 101]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
SNEEDE V. KEER 
RESPONSIBLE RELATIVE DETERMINATION 
(Complete Only if Parent is in MFBU) 
t.U- 
Year 
INSTRUCnONS 
Next complete the MC 1753P for Propuny DetermiMtions or the MC 1- for Share of Cost DctcmriMtions. 
I. mmets) of PARENTSPOUSE 
(00 rn m P- PA). 
11. SDMe bm-c - it unnmm@. 
Ill. Lir!WIlasbrvhom~6refWnsiblC kn- 
and brilQ(rsn). DO NOT LIST UNBORN. PAKITHER PA 
N. T~NlrnLXrofDerYmptrcma~~ 
oaermmmxl (m~~~~ml,U..ndIfl) Tmnsa~ht!1~oimt 
MC I753P. 
V. ~mt10r~Ain~kS&naaaforRraEBin 
CobnnE 
w. 7d-af~~aam~r-b-4lame 
wL (lmeWmm~6linV) TmPCrmliK2Baime29af 
mt MZ 1EaL 
.- 
SECTION NO.: 50373 MANUAL LRTER NO.: 2 1 2 DATE: my 10 I399 8F-66 
(A) 
I 
1. 
I 
I 
I 
I 
-1 
i 
-1

[page 104]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
-- - -- -- - - 
XI. ALLOCAIIOS FROM SPOUSE TO SPOUSE (ddp If MFBU doer nu cootsin a aurried eoupk) 
i18.Toxd(.dd~ 16 d17). lhisis&sp~r~e'storrlshtofthcirna 
I mnuemptm- (EmerthirmnorrmonMCl754mrhe~ 
1 conph's mini budge! unimdr) i i 
l IIL hm KO?;EXEhfPT PROPERIT FOR CHILDREN OR NON-PAREhT CARETAKER RELAfTvE (Do not Ibt Pnborns) 
Name of QIJd m Cucr+lcc Rave i 3- 
I 
I l- 12- 1 L. I s- 
I I 
istc~~x (circk~m~orborh) 1.~~1 ABAB 1 ABIAB 
Em an alldon from Seaion I. line 15 onfy if this is the child's narmaVadaptive parat 
be bbnk if camakcr rehive bo&oId. 
XTXT COMPLETE MC I754 
SECTION NO.: 50373 
1 1 
I 
1 I 
25. I I 
26. TOTAL 1 
MANUAL LETTER NO.: 2 1 2 DATE: MAY I 0 1939 8F68 
n.APaadrrnfrcrmmA* I 
28. All- hm Arent B* I I I I 
29. Na Waupt Pmpeny 
(Addlima.Sbf7.28)EarPmMCI?% 
Enrtr an allcraion from Sakm I. line 15 only if this is the child's nammbbptivc parwt 
teavebbnkifQhtanrrlativebclU&oId. 
I 
I 
f

[page 105]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
SNEEDE V. KfZER 
NET NONEXEMPT INCOME DETERMINATION 
tocrrn 
I-- I=-- I 
trv- eaac 
Year 
INSTRUCTIONS 
Chll61.pQu..ltuppQn 
WMh'-d Cwd~alrnnnetome~~mmeparanror~w~ 
ut~bs(rtl.l) Page 7 d 2 
SECTION NO.: 50373 MANUAL LmER NO.: 2 1 2 DATE: YAY 1 0 I399 SF49 
1s- 3- 10- 13- /n w 
Ic I#WJDOYPTuN€uwEDUICDYE 
, . -mw4z- A - w- - . 
1. RSDl I 1 1 I I 
2Mtrmmempopsll 1 
I 3.w-m- I I 
4. 'Wncane 
5. lnmgr#MLelromF&a-PA 
(WC 1756. h u.1 
6 Omar: I 
7. cxhar: I I 1 t 
a~oo~em~i~~~) 
s.-ABPMNSp.nd~~aaaem 
mu- 
lo. -urmrcr~(klD8nn6ho. 
marm8eUmD.hcl6) 
EmM~(or~~aYa~-noma: 
I 1 
, -- 
-- - -

[page 106]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
SECTiON NO.: 50373 MANUAL LElTER NO.: 2 1 2 
- 
DATE: MAY 1 0 f999 8F-70

[page 107]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
Marth Year 
INSTRUCTIONS 
SNEEDE V. KIZER 
NET NONEXEMPT INCOME D~~~~~j~~TiON-Continwtion Sheet 
SECTION NO.: 50373 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 2 1 2 DATE: MAY 10 1999 8F-71 
am -- I--

[page 108]
MEDICAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
SECTION NO.: 50373 MANUAL EIER NO.: 2 1 2 DATE: YAY 1 0 1939 8F-72

[page 109]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
SNEEDE v. KIZER MINI BUDGET UNlTS AND: 
(CHECK ONLY ONE) 3 SHARE OF COST DETERMINATIONS 
3 PROPERTY DrTRMINATIONS 
Instructions: 
1. include unborn in the mothefs mini budget unit (MBU) and property Iimitfmaintenance need income leve!. unless mother is 
married and only her separate children wan; Medi-Cal. If pregnant woman is PAIOther PA, include the unborn in the 
s?ousels or father's MBU. 
2. Do not include an excluded cttild. 
3. Do no? list MBU members in more than one MBU. 
4. I: any MBU has excess properly, check to see if Medical linkage still exists for other family nem%rs. 
5. Property Determinations: Enter the allocation for each spouse from MC 1753P. line 18. Enter the ne: nonexemp; property 
for each child andlor caretaker relative from MC 175-3P. line 29. 
6. Share of Cos: Determinations: Enter each person's net nonexempt income from MC 7 75-31. 
7. If only the separate children of one spouse want Medi-Cal. enter the amounts from lines 13 and 23 of MC 176W.7 for 
property determinations and the amounts from lines 26 and 29 Or !ine 28 0: the MC i76W.1 for share of cost 
detemnations. 
! MBU t 
I 
i j 
2 
/ persop NamUNumWr ions I ~er 3~row ' 
j 1 ~onu- 3 income 
I1 
M3Us j Ropury Limn 
cchaxae) DMa-Wce 
3 --ny 
(=one) D SMre d Costar 
-persDm I 
Row Share of Cor. 1 I 
n S3C. as mere an ehgak pfegnax mn or child unoe: 19 m MBU? 
j No: st03 here. i 
3 Yes: go tc Mt 1=5 I 
1 MBU $ I 
I TOTAL ! i 
3 Nc: here. 
3 Yes: CKJ !D MC 175.5 
SECTION NO.: 50373 MANUAL LmER NO.: 2 1 2 DATE: WAY 1 0 EEIS 8F-13

[page 110]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
I TOTAL i I 
MBU 8 
(=one) 3 Maim- Need 1 
1ExcessPfoDefW ! 1 
MBU r 
1 
1 3 Sac. n  the^ an e@Ie pregm womac or mild unoer 19 m MBU? 
J No: sm here. 
I J Yes; go $0 MC 1755 
Pecan NarneNumScr I Perswr NamdNumMr 
I Iz!Ne; ! Nonexemz 3 Income , 
3h~e5yI 
! (CMclr one: 3 Maanerame Nee= 1 
I 
I 
J Exatst-werty I 
(heok C~CI rl Share e: cos: tor i I 
I: S3C, a mere an ebgble pregz?rr. wonan or mild unoer :D m MBU? i 
I J No: na- here. 
3 Yes: gc to MC 1755 i 
I MBU ,' I I MBU t 1 
I Person NamerNumDer iOrig / Ne: 
I AK! / Nonexm a ZF I 
. - , . 
I TOTAL I I TOTAL I I 
--. 
RoMdedSrrare~fCon i 
If SDC, s there M eii@ble pregnan: woman or cMd uneer 19 m MBU? 
I 
No; &p here. 
D Yes: go m MC 175-5 
n SOC. is there an digink prqmz woman or errild moer 19 in MW? 
fJ Yes: p m MC 1755 
SECTION NO.: 50373 MANUAL ETER NO.: .2 1 2 DATE: YAY 1 0 99 8F-74

[page 111]
MEDI-CAL ELfGIBILfTY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
SNEEDE V. KIZER 
FEDERAL POVERTY LEVEL (FPL) PROGRAMS FOR 
PREGNANT WOMEN AND INFANTS (INCOME DISREGARD, 200 PERCENv/oJ), 
CHILDREN AGES 1 THROUGH 5 (133 PERCENT p/o]), AND 
CHILDREN AGES 6 THROUGH 18 (100 PERCEKT p/o]) 
- JIB b_ - --- 
ase name 
I-- ! Enecvve cate ~monrtuwr) 
I I 
INSTRUCTIONS: 
1. Complete this form for all of the potential percentage program eligibles whose MBU has a share of cost. 
2. Net Nonexempt Family Income: enter the full net nonexemp; income of the percent (YO) program eligible and hislher 
responsible relatives (i.e., spouse or naturaVadoptive parent); do no: enter the Sneede allocattons. 
a. If the potential percent (Oh) program eligible is: 
an unmarried pregnam woman, use only her income; 
a pregnant minor, use her income and her parents' income, if they are in the home; 
a married pregnant woman, use her and her spouse's income; 
a child. use the child's and naturavadoptive parents' income, ii they are in the MFBU. 
b. If the potential percent (%) program eligible andlor hislher responsible relatives are: 
. AFDGMNIMI, add iines 20 and 25 from MC 173.31; 
ABD-MN, first complete another MC 175-31 (lines 1 through 25). allow only AFDCMN deductions, and enter the 
total from line. 20 and 25. 
c. When only the separate children of one spouse want Medi-Cat, full net nonexempt parental income does NOT 
include income allocations to persons outside of the MFBU. (Use amount from MC 176 W.l, line 30, for 
responsible relative net nonexempt income.) 
A NET NONEXEMPT FAMILY INCOME DEERMINATION 
1. Name of potential percent (Oh) I I i I I 
program eigible in MBU with 
SOC 
I 
i 2. Name of responsiMe relative 1 
i number 1 
i 
3. Name of responsible rWie 
number 2 
4. FuIl net nonexempt imome of 
mnt eb) program MWe 
5. Fun net nonexempt inme of 
respo&ble relahe number 1 
6. Full na nmexemW income o! 
responsiSle relative number 2 
I 
7. TOW net nonexempt family 1 i 
income (aw tines 4.5. and 6 i 
and enter on 8.4.) s s I ! I 
SECTION NO.: 50373 
- 
MANUAL LETTER NO.: 2 1 2 DATE: 1 0 8F-75

[page 112]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
B. ELIGIBILITY DETERMINATION Nurnbe: of persons in MFBL 
1 1 i i I 
1. Name of potential pereen: p?) 
prostam eligie I 
2. Potential percent program 
(check one) 
4. Enter total net nonexerrp: 
family income (from A7.) 
3. Enter FPL for percent (%) 
program shown in 82. based on 
the number of persons in M-U. 
CI hmme -tc 
ZOOpwpr(%) 
Zlls~ehenrw 
Jx~pehsn:(%~ 
to amount in B3.? 
S 
6. Person number (optional) 
T- 
3 w-w ecmgm 
200c~m=(%) 
3:33peran:(%i 
3 yes.- 3 yes. -we 5. Is total net nonexempt family 
S 
inme (8.4.) rn than or equal 1-1 (-=) t-) i 
3. MSU number (optional) 
I 
3 yes. ekgae 
IJ 
ye6 e~me 
I 
I. Aid code (optima0 
SECTION NO.: 50373; MANUAL LEl7ER NO.: 2 1 2 DATE: MAY 10 '1999 8F-76 
3 - ec=way CI 1- medqam 
m-n mceiiw 
3~sphen:~io) 3r~aezn:rw 
Dmopcamn~io) [31m-n:(%1 ,g i~t.=%! 
s 
3~8s.ekuue 
i I 
3 --warn 
_-=_I 
Jlsm(%t 
3 impehenr!%) 
s

[page 113]
MEDJ-CAL ELIGIBILIIY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
SP~~O.WI-I+IW*~~ Rprmar.bh~amScmrr 
SNEEDE V. KlZER 
ALLOCATION FROM AN SSI OR IHSS PERSON 
(INCLUDES ALLOCATION FROM PICKLE PERSON TO MFBU) 
I 
Complete this fonn when there is an income allocation from an SSI, IHSS, or Pickle person to the MFBU, OR the MFBU 
has income which is used to determine SSI, IffSS, or Pickle eligibility. 
Note: If the MFBU indudes either the stepparerr? or unmarried partner of an SSI or IHSS recrpien! and that MFBU member3 
income was used to determine SSI or IHSS eligibility o! the recipient, the Eligibil~ Worker will allow that portion of the 
MFBU member's income which was used to determine SSI, IHSS. or Pickle eligiSility as a deduction against hisher 
own income. 
DO NOT TREAT THE UNhURRtED COUPLE AS SPOUSES ON ANY WORK SHEET. 
Name d PPJOWr PA perSOn 
A. Income Available From the SSI or IHSS Person (including income available from a Pickle ,persc~n to the MFBU) 
1. Enter the amount from Section II, line 11 of MC 776 W (If there is income available S 
from the Pickle person to the MFBU, enter the amount from line 3, column Ill, of 
the MC 176 M.) 
2. Enter the names of the persons in the MFBU for whom the SSI, IHSS. or Pickle 
person is responsible (i-e., spouse and naturaWadopted children). 
Do NOT list: unboms, any PAIOther PA persons, or excluded persons. 
3. Totl number of persons listed in Section A, line 2. 
4. Allocation to each person listed in Section A, line 2. (divide line Al. by line A.3.). 
Enter this amount on MC 17531, Section A, line 5. 
B. Income Used to Determine SSI, HSS, or Pickle Eligibility 
3 (Check here if this section is applicable.) 
Enter amount from Section 11, line 12 of MC 176 W, on lme 22 of the MC 17531 of the MFBU member whose income was 
used to determine SSI, .IHSS, or Pickle eligibiii. 
If two persons have income which is used to determine SSI. IHSS. or Pi&? eligibiJii and the Eligibility Worker is unabk to 
determine how much of each person's income was used, divide the income in half AND give each person one-half of the 
income deduction. If one-half of the couple does no: have suffidem income to fully use the deduaon, give the unused 
ponion of the income deduction to the other person. 
SECTION NO.: 50373 MANUAL LE'TlER NO.: 2 1 2 DATE: MAY 1 0 8F-77

[page 115]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILI'lY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
SNEEDE V. KIZER 
ALLOCATION WORK SHEm 
BOARD AND CARE PERSON TO SPOUSE AND/OR CHILDREN AT HOME 
OR 
LTC PERSON (AFDGMNIMI) WlTH NO COMMUNIM SPOUSE TO CHILDREN AT HOME 
INSTRUCTIONS 
~teansbrn,only~StdiooII~onMC176Wu~&andfrn13ofma:te~on~~wxwt:~~thanzero. 
'ae rpme 
tor- 
A NAE OF LTU80ARD AND CAFE PERSOW 
8. RESPONSIBLE RELAW MTUMINATION 
CMlr- 
EIICAI0.P 
Month Year 
I. Erin, trun 6ne 13 d Section Ill m MC 176 W. 
SECTION NO.: 50373 MANUAL LEER NO.: '2 1 2 DATE: M~Y 1 0 1999 8F-78

[page 117]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
STEPPARENT COMPUTATION 
WHEN ONLY THE SEPARATE CHILDREN OF ONE SPOUSE WANT MEDI-CAL 
t 
tacw E- oae 
j Year 
Instructions: 
This work sheet is to be used when only the separate children of one spouse want Medial. The MFBU will consist of only 
the naturaVadoptive parent (as an ineligible person) and hisrher separate children who want MedCGal. IMPORTANE IF 
PARENT IS PAlOTHER PA. DO NOT COMPLETf THIS FORM; THE MFBU WlLl CONSIST OF ONLY THE SEPARATE 
CHILDREN WHO WANT MEDI-CAL 
Do not indude in this MFBU the parent's spouse, mutual children, spouse's separate cqildren, or the parent's other separate 
children who do not want Medi-Cal. 
Only a portion of the naturaVadoptive parent's income and property will. be used in these deteninations. The res! will be 
consjdered as allocations to the spouse and to the parems other naturauadopted children whc oo no; want Medi-Cal. 
Enter exempt propern and/or income on a separate sheer of paps. 
I. RESPONSIBLE RELATIVE DETrRMINATlON-Do not Itst PAlOther PA, Unboms, or Stepchildren 
A Enter name of parent who wants Medt-Cat for only hisher se en: 
E. Enter name of spouse: 
C. Enter the names of AU the parems mtmltadopted childre 
both the children who do and who do not want Medt-CaI): 
D. Total number of persons in lines IA through 1.C. 
b 
'UZ 176 W.Y.: Om, 
SECTION NO.: 50373 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 2 1 2 DATE: MAY 1 0 1999 8F-79

[page 118]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
11. PROPERTY DETERMINATION 
A. Allocation from NaturaUAdoptive Parent 
Consider only the naturaUadoptive parent3 separate and 0ne-W community propem; enter the total amount under 
Column II. 
If properly is owned by more than one person. equally divide the nei markei value by the number of owners unIe55 
evidence is provided to rebv: the division. 
Join? bank amounts: If available to the MFBU, do not count the money In 2 joint account agarns the MFBU more 
than once. Equaiiy d~v;de the bank account by the number of owners in the MFBU (subject to rebuttal). 
Lst Only the Par- Nowmpt Property I Value 
1. Excess other real property I - 
2. Chedtrng I 
I 3. Savings 
4. Lrfe murance (CSV) I 
5. Cash 
I 
I 
I 6. Nonexemp! vehlcle 
7. Other I 
8. 
9. I 
10. 1 
11. Total net nonerempt propew 1 
12. Number of pewns for whom parent rs responsiMe 
(enter total from sectton I.D.) 
13. Alloz3bon to each person for whom parent rs 
I 
rsponsbk (divide line 17 by 11ne 12) 1 
If ine&$ble due to excess property and the separate chUd(ren) who want Medi-Cal has own nonexempt property, Snade case eS. 
Complete MC 17% next. EasXi a smgk rruni budge: me for me pare,: and hiir separaSe chiklren who fMle nD @mnh exem) 
properly of hiikr a. EstabIM a separate mmi budget Ml. for each cbii with a nonexew property Enter anwnt from W 13 
parents net nonexemp: pqmty on MC 175 S-4. Enter amount from he 23 as chi= net nonexempt pmperly on MC 175 S-4. 
B. Net Nonexempt Property of Children in MFBU 
Enter Name of Each Child in the MFBU 1 1. i 2. ' 3 
15. C- 1 I I 
15. Savings I s f t I s 
16. Nanexempt vehrcle f I 
17. Nonexempt ORP 1 
-* "Z. I 
if property eligible. continue. 
~ge2or4 UC 176 W.? niR8) 
18. Other , 
19. 
I 20. 
SECflON NO.: 50373 
I 
I 
WNUAL LETTER NO.: 2 1 2 DATE: MAY 1 0 899 8F-80 
21. TOTAL I I 
22. Allocation from parent (enter amount from 
itne 13 in each child's box) 
23. Subtd net nonexempt property for MFBU 
I 
(add lines 21 and 22) 
24. TOW ne! nonexempt propew for MFBU (add 
all the wbtotals from lines 13 and 23) 
25. Mer properly hmit for MfBU 
i 
I 
26. propeQ' I I

[page 119]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILIN PROCEDURES MANUAL 
Ill. SHARE OF COST DE7ERMINAflON 
INSTRUCTIONS: 
Do not consider COnImUnity income; use "name on the check" rule. Consider only the paren:'s income and income of the 
separate child who wants Medi-Gal. 
3. 'Net child/spousai SuppOc recelvw 1 I I I 
r. -inkind rncome I 
I I I 
5. 
I 
I I I 
ChildlSpousal Support Payments Recerved: Child support s rncome to the child, no: to the parent or careiake: relative. 
For AFDGMWMlonly: Dlvlde the S50 per month deduction by tne numW of persons for whom the Income 1s 
~ntended. Any unused remainder will be prorated among t9e remantng persons who still 
have support payments to apply against the deductton. 
For ABD-MN only: Each ABPMN child for whom abseni parent suppotl payrnens are mended will receive a 
one-thtrd deduaon from this income. 
" Unearned In-Kind Income.: Prorate the unearned in-krnd income among the persons whc receive the income. 
Example: MFBU of four gets free housng. Use ln-klnd tnc3me for four and each person 
gets one-fourth of the in-lana Income. If pregnant minor in MFBU, add unborn's share to 
the pregnant minor's share of ~n-kina Income. 
- ABDMN Deductions: Allow the ABD-MN child: S20 any lncome deduction and S65 plus one-half earned 
Income deductJon. 
Allow each ABDMN adult or parent of an ABD-MN child: S20 any income deduction 
and S65 plus one-hatf earned Income deduaon. 
NOTE: ti any of me follwng Oe$u=rrons a73l-y . complete MC 176 W. Pai; VI before mnpleunp Sectrons A 0' 5 
EoucmonaI .,-.-...-..----,. Sewn 5D37 
Stuben: Deouaon -..-..----.-... 2- 50551 
530 Plus l/S ,. Sewn 50j51.1 
Work Expenses for me BlmC ,-..---.--......,... S-c 50551 L 
Income for SeIf-S-n Seamn 50531 5 
ENTER NAME OF EACH MFBU MEMBER 
(7milllls8;enterontedmD.frnel5) 1 1 1 1 
B. -NONMEMPT EARNED INCOME-- 
A3D-MN ONLY 
I I I 
I 
7. Total (add 1 thnr 6) I I i I 
- 
10. Gros earned mcome 1 I I 
11. $65 Earned Lnc. Deducmn PLUS I I I 1 
PERSON TYPE 13 Parent 13 Child / 3 Chilz 13 Child 
A NONEXEMPT UNEARNED INCOME: 
AFDCMWMI andlor A3MN 
1. RSDl ! 1 1 
2. Net income from ~roxnv I j 
8. -ABDMN SO any mc. beducbon 
(skip if AFDGMNIMI) 
9.CwntaMertneamedm 
I 
. 1 
I I 1 
-- 
c. NONWMPT EARNED INCOME-- 
WDGMNn.41 ONLY - 
14. Net earned income (MC176 W. Pan IV, I 
tine 10) (enter on se3ton D. i~ne 16) ! i ! 
EWER COMPUTATION FOR CHILDEPOUSAL SUPPO3T and/or UNEARNED IWND INCOME: 
s unused $20 ~i B)( I I 1 
SECTION NO.: 50373 MANUAL LmR NO-: 2 1 2 DATE: 1 0 1999 SF-81 
12. Remainder (10 minus 11) I I I 
, - I 
13. CountaMe earned income (dnde 
ti 12 by 2) (enter on seaon D. i

[page 120]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
17. Total countable income (add lines 19 
and 16) I I i ! 
E. OTilER DEDUCTIONS: 
AFDC-hWRai and/ar.ABDMN i 
Ill. SHARE OF COST DElERMlNATlON (continued) 
D. TOTAL COUNTABLE INCOME: 
I- l Nam 
1 Name 
AFDGMNNI andtor ABDMN I 
18. HeaRh insurance - I I 
1 9. Child support-  aid I I I 1 
15. Count* unearned tncome 
(from he 9) 
16. Countable earned Income 
lfrnrn ilno l? nr ldl 
1 1 
! 
I i I 
20. , - I I j I 
If SOC and separate children have own income. Sneede case e&b. hiex!, Compdete MC 1754 and fsbbksh separate mini budget unit 
for parent and hisher chiidren who have no (or exempt) income of their own. Enter amwnts from tine 26 (for each child in parews MBU) 
and the amount from line 29 (for the parent). fstaSlish a sepaate mini budgel uns for each chikj with avn nonexempt Wme. Enter 
amount from line 28 as child's total ne: income. 
-.A%,T: 21. 
22. Total a~~ocai~on/~uct~ons 
23. Total net awntable Income less 
in-kind mcome (line 17 mtnus hne 4 
and 22) Enter thas on MC 175-4 if no 
parent m MFBU. otherwrse cbnttnua 
If SOC and SVte children are under 6, or age 6 through 18. and do not have separate income 0.e. not a Sneede case). consider 
Federal PW Lwel Programs (100 percen;. 133 percent, 200 percent). Use parent's income after albcattohs to persons ou!sae of tne 
MFBU (i-e.. Only consider income wn~c!~ n used in determining the share of cwt). (Line 30) 
I 
i I 
I I 
1 i 
i I 
i 
! ! 
MC 776 w. om., pagere+& 
SECTION NO.: 50373 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 2 1 2 DATE: 10 8F-82 
(add 18 mrough 21) ! i I 
F. PARENTAL ALLOCATION. Enter ne? countable mcome (Itne 23) 
AFDCMNlMl and/or ABD-MN 
fskm if no =rent in MFBU) . 1117 g I Less Parental Needs Deducti~r.

[page 121]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
Czse Name Case Number 
Sneede v. Kizer 
Excluded Child Statement from Parent or Caretaker Relative 
(New Application and Annual Redetermination) 
1 understand that can get Medi-CaI, 
-1 -! 
and that his or her inAme and property will not affect the Medi-Cal benefrts 
which other farniiy members and I receive. I do not want to appiy for Me&-Cal 
for this child. 
U=OCSC3@wm) 
SECTION NO.: 50373 MANUAL WR NO.: 2 1 2 DATE: MAY 1 0 I999 8F-83

[page 123]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
Nombre del caso Nhero del caso 
Sneede v. Kizer 
DECLARACION DEL PADRUMADRE 0 PARIENTE ENCARGADO, 
SOBRE EL MENOR DE EDAD EXCLUIDO 
(Nueva soiicitud y nueva determinacibn anuai) 
Tengo entendido que es posible que 
gpnmmlro) 
reaba benefiaos de Medi-Cal, y que sus ingresos o bienes no afectarAn 10s 
benefiaos de Medi-Cal que recibimos otros miembros de mi familia y yo. No 
deseo solicitar benefiaos de Medi-Cal para este menor de edad. 
. 
SECTION NO.: 50373 MANUAL LEllER NO.: 2 1 2 'DATE: MAY 1 0 899 8F-84

[page 125]
MEDI-GAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
MEDI-CAL r 
NOTICE OF ACTION 
SNEEDE V. KlZER 
APPROVAL FOR BENEFiTS OR 
CHANGE IN SHARE-OF-COST 
- 1 Not~ce care: 
Case nu*:: 
Worker nane'wmer: 
Worker tebhsne nu-=-: 
I Thlsafless: - 
This case has been affected by a lawsuit called Sneede K Kirer. A federal court ruled tha: Medi-Cai can only use the 
income of certain family memSen when figuring the shareof-ms! of someone who receives Me5i-Cal. This means that 
some family members may have different shares-ofcost. 
3 The appllcaiiori for Medi-Cai beneffls for the people listed above has been approved and benefits will begin the first 
day of . They have no share-of-cost. 
3 The application for Medi-Car benefits for the people listed above has been approved and be~ffis wit! begin the first 
day of . Their share-of-cos: is S 
3 The Medi-Cai share-ofcos? for people listed above has changed from S tc S 
3 The peopie Sied above will receive their Medial card soon. 
3 The income used to figure me sRare-ofcost is as follows: 
Person Net Amount 
Total net nonexempt income .................. S 
Maintenanceneed .......................... S 
.Excess income ............................ S 
Adjusaent ................................ S 
Sharwf cost .............................. S 
You will receive a plastic ~eneffis Identification Card PIC) in the mail soon for each eligible child. TAKE THIS BIC TO 
YOUR MEDICAL PROVIDER WHENEVER YOU NEED CARE. This card is good as long as you are eligible for 
Medi-Cal. DO NOTTHROW AWAY YOUR BIC. 
If there are any changes in address, income, property, family members, living arrangements, or if you have any 
questions, please write or phone your worker within ten days. 
The regulations which require this action are California Code of Regulations, Title 22, Sections 50653 and 
Sneede v. Kzer. 
PLEASE READ THE REVERSE SIDE OF TnlS NOnCE. 
w 
SECTION NO.: !XI373 MANUAL LEllER NO.: 2 1 2 DATE: I* 1 0 8F-85

[page 127]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
NOT~FICAC~ON DE ACCION 
DE MEDI-CAL 
SNEEDE VS. KIZER 
APROBACION DE BENEFICIOS 0 
CAMBIO EN PARE DEL COST0 
Nheru Oe: m: 
Nornbrehirmen oe! majaoo:;a;: 
Tei6tanc oe: ?aa$ios:;e): 
Este caso se ha visto afectado por la demanda conocida comc, Sneede vs. Kizer. Un :riiunal federal dictamino que 
Medi-Cal solo puede utiiizar 10s ingresos de cienos miernbros de una familia a1 ca1cui~- ia Dane del costo de alguien que 
recibe Medi-Cal. Esto significa que aigunos miembros de k famiiiz podrian tener diferentes pzrres del costo. 
2 La solicitud para recibir beneficios de Medi-Cal de hs personas enurneradas anteriomente SE ha aprobado y ios 
beneficios C0mntar;in a pazir del primer dia de . Es@ no tienez pane 5el costo. 
. 3 La soriud para recibir benefidos de Medi-Cal de hs personas enumeradas anieriormente se ha aprobado y 10s 
benefidos cornenzafin a partir be! primer dia de . Su pane del costo es de S 
3 La pane de! cost0 de Medi-Cal oe L?s persow enumeradas anreriormente ha ctrsiadc =e S aS . 
3 Las personas enumeradas anteriorrnente recibien su tarjeta de Medi-Cal en breve. 
3 Los ingresos utilizados par2 caicutar It pane de! asto son Ics siguientes: 
Persona Cantidad Neta 
lngresos totales netos no exemos. ............. 
Necesidad de man~rtencion. .................. 
lngresosenexceso ......................... ..................................... Ajuste 
Parte del costo. ............................ 
Pronto. usted recidie por correo una Tajeta de Identificadbn de Benefidos (BIC) de ol&co wra cad2 uno de 10s nihos 
- que reuna 10s requisitos. UEVE ESTA BIC A SU PROVEEDOR MEDICO CADA VEZ QUE NECESITE QUF LE 
ATIENDAN. Esta tarjeta es vSlida mientras usred reuna los requisitos de Medi-Cal. NO TIRE SU B!C. 
Si hay aIg6n cambio be direction. ingress, bienes, mrembros de la :amilia. anealos de vivienrja o si tiene alguna 
pregunta. por favor escriba o llarne por teUfono a su trabajador(2) en un piaZ0 de difz dias. 
Las regutadones que exigen est accion son la demanda Sneede vs. Kizery la Seccion 50553. oei Tituio 22, del Codigo 
de Reguiaciones de California. 
MANUAL LETTER NO.: 2 1 2 DATE: my I 0 8F-86

[page 129]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
MEDI-CAL 
NOTICE OF ACTION 
SNEEDE V. KlZER 
DeniaUDiscontinuance of Benefits 
Due to Excess Property 
(Mini Budget Unit) 
This case has been affeded by a buil Eased Snrede v. m. A fed& cow. Nled tha: MediCal ck? only use the prowny of 
certain family members when fguring meone's Media eiigibilii. This mas that urne tamii members may be eli and 
others may not be eIii due lo excess pmperly. 
3 The ap-n for Medii beneMs for the people listed above has been dwied to ProPe*. 
3 Wi benefits for the peoSe Ksted ave mi stop the bs! day of due to excess propeq. 
v 
3 The people listed abwe are not ehgibk for Med-Cal because your famiry owns more than one car or piece of real pqmty- These 
people may 5e able to get Mediil if you want to make the other car or other real propeq exempt If yw do tha:. some people 
who are in your fame who can now gel Med'i may become ineIigrble. Call your worker within 10 days If you want advice 
about changing ywr exemptions. 
I. MINI BUDGET UNIT 11. MEM-CAL FAMILY BUDGET UNIT 
Persons Net Amount F-s Total Nel Nonexempt Propeq S 
S Farrtiis Property Limit - S 
S FamafsTota) Excess Property 5 
Total Net Nonexempt 
property- 
-Property 
Your mWe tamfly may be eligible for Mediil if Phsy mset dl other eiigibnw m@rernarts and the excess prop0fty 
by the amoum shawn above in Column 11 mr Fes Tom1 Ercaz+ Propay. H ywt tamily duus the ucers propvty 
, on any of the month, they will be propenyanOtMe for Umt entire month 
DO NOT THROW AWAY YOUR BENEFlTS IDENTIFICATION CARD If YOU RECEIVED ONE YOU be aMe to agabr 0- 
yw - y=-.proPeny. 
If you have any we-, yw works. The reghths wtkh require this adion are aomia Cede of AeguWom. 
Tip~5M01~50C89and~r.Ktrttt 
PLEASE R W THE REEE SIDE OF THIS NOTlCE 
SECTION NO.: 50373 MANUAL LETER NO.: 2 1 2' 'DATE: MAY 10 1999 ~~-87

[page 131]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILIW PROCEDURES MANUAL 
NOTIFICAC~ON DE ACCION - 
i 
DE MEDI-GAL 
SNEEDE VS. KIZER 
NegacionlDescontinuaci6n de Beneficios 
Debido a Exceso de Bienes 
(Unidad de Mini Presupuesto) 
- 
I Fe- de k cT5irt.: ; 
Nirmerc oer so: 
Nomre ae: ::uajamr:z.: 
Ninnero ae! ::aajamrz:: 
  stoat-2: 
-%e caso se ha visto afeado p3r la dernanca de Sneede vs. Kirer. Un tribunal federal di~arnino qGe Meo'iGal solamente puede 
utili: 10s Sienes de ciertas mie3bras de la famihi al determinar la elqibilidad be alguien aaa r&ir MedCai. ESo signiifica que 
algunm miembrcs be la familia Wrian reunir 10s requisits para recbir beneficis y atros no ce3ido al ex=%so de bienes. 
3 k solidud para tedbir benefbos de Medical de hs personas enumeradas arriba se ha negado de>i== al exceso je bienes. 
3 Los benefiaos de Medi-Cal de las --as enumeraaas arriba war;in el uhrno dia de aebib: a! excso de bienes. 
fm5L4CI 
3 tas personas enmradas ameriormente no reljnen hs requisitos pan recibir MediiJ puesto oue su familia es propietaria de 
m& de un autorn6vil o piera de Sienes raices. Es posbk que personas puedan re&t: MedGai si udeC oesea dedarar el 
otro auto o bienes raices exeatm. Si lo Face, alounas miemSros de su familia que ahora re:iSen Mesi-Cal pmrian dejar de reunir 
Ics requisi~s. Uarne a w nabajador(a) en un plaro de 10 dhs si desea que le aconsejen sabre el cambio de exenciones. 
1. UNlDAD DE MINI PRESUPUESTO 11. UNIDAD DE PRESUPUESTO FAMILIAR DE MEDCCAL 
Personas Cantidad Neta Tad de bienes nu exems nerm w la famlia S 
s Limile Ue bienes de la %I?& -S 
S Tui de biwes en aces de k k+iia s 
Total de bienes no exentos net= S 
Limite de bienes - S 
Bienes en exceso S 
Toda su farnili pod* reunir ios requisitos para reeibir MediiCal si cumple wn todos 10s otros requisltos be clegibilidad y . 
reduce el exeeso de bienes por h cantidad qw se indica arriba en ta Columna U conforme al Total de biems en exeeso be b 
famiIia Si su farniii reduce el ex- de bi tualquier dla del mes, reunir;l los requuis de biens be todo ese mes 
NO TlRE SU TAWETA DE IDWFICACI~N DE BENEFlClOS S1 LA REClBlb. Podria utifaaria nwvameme una vez que reduzca su 
ex- de bienes. 
S tiene alguna pregunta. por favor smuniquese mn w trabajador(a). Las reguhdones que requierer: em acsion s3n ks secdones 
50401 a 50489. del Titulo 22. dei CWio de Regulaciones de Wdornia y'k dm Sneede vr Kirer. 
POR FAVOR LEA EL REVERS0 DE ESTA N~T~FICACI$N. 
ucas yes esp) a98) 
SECTION NO.: 50373 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 12 1 2 M*. 1 0 Igg9 8~48

[page 133]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
INDEX PAGE 
Overview .............................................................. 1 
......................................................... Effective Date 1. 2 
............................................ Linkage to the Medi-Cal Program 2 
Responsible Relative Determination ......................................... 2 
Mini-Budgetunits ...................................................... 3.4 
Income and Propew Allocations .......................................... 4. 5 
Maintenance Need and Property Limits ..................................... 5 . 6 
................................................. Property Determination 6-10 
................................................. Income Determination 10-14 
Changes in MFBU Rules for Certain Sneede and Non-Sneede Cases ............ 14-17 
Federal Poverty Level Programs ........................................... 17 
................................... Lack of Cooperation or Loss of Contact 18. 19 
..................................... Impact on Other Lawsuits/Programs 19. 20 
Examples 
A . Property 
1 . Stepparent Household Wtth Separate & Mutual Children ........ 21. 22 
................................... 2 . Children With Property 23. 24 
3 . Unmarried Couple Wfih Separate and Mutual Children .......... .2 5-27 
B . Property and Income 
...................... 4 . Unmarried Couple Wtth Mutual Children 28-30 
C . Income 
..................... 5 . Spouses and Mutual Child Wrth Income 31. 32 
6 . Stepparent Household Wtth Mutual and Separate Children .......... 33 
......................................... 7 . Child Wrth Income 34 
..................... 8 . Stepparent Household Nth In-Kind Income 35 
9 . Stepparent Household and the Percent Programs ................ 36 
10 . Stepparent Household When Only the Separate Child(ren) of One 
.................................. Parent Wishes Medi-Cal 37.38 
.................... . 11 Stepparent Household - Spouse in LTClB&C 39 
................... . 12 Excluded Child Case - Parents Cooperate .4 0-42 
........... 13 . Excluded Child Case - Parents Refuse to Cooperate 43.44 
14 . Stepparent Household With Pregnant Minor and Her Boyfriend ... .4 5-47 
15 . Stepparent Household With Minor Mother. Minor Mother's Baby. 
............................. and Minor Mother's Boyfriend 48. 49 
16 . Married Couple W~th Mutual Children; Unmarried Pregnant Minor ' 
and Father of the Unborn. Filing for Minor Consent ............. 50. 51 
......................... 17 . PAlOther PA Person in Household 52 . 53 
........................... . 18 Married Minor Living in the Home 54-58 
..................................................... ChartsandFoms 59-88 
SECTION NO . . 50373 MANUAL LE7TER NO . . 2 1 2 DATE: MAY 1 (1 Igg9 8F-89

[page 135]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
8G -MFBU DETERMINATIONS FOR THE SECTION 1931(b) PROGRAM 
A. BACKGROUND 
The Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity ReconciliaJjon Act (PRWW) of 1996 (Public Law 
104-1 93) established a new mandatory coverage group at Sectioh 193l(b) of the Social Security Act. 
Section 1931 (b) requires that Medi-Cal be provided to low-income families, who meet the provisions 
of the July 16, 1996, Aid to Families with Dependent Children (AFDC) State plan requirements for 
income, resources and deprivation, (subject to modification at State option). PRWORA also deleted 
many of the requirements for establishing deprivation based on unemployment. 
Section 161 of A6 1542 (Chapter 270, Statutes of 1997) established the California Work Opportunity 
and Responsibility to Kids (CalWORKs) program and provided that it was to be implemented January 1, 
1998. This bill also adopted Section 14005.30 of the Welfare and Institutions Code which provided that 
to the extent federal financial participation is available, the Department of Health Services shall extend I 
eligibility for health care services under Medi-Cal to all recipients of aid under CalWORKs as well as 
those in the Section 1931 (b) Only program. 
For purposes of establishing requirements for the Section 1931(b) group, the July 16, 1996, AFDC 
provisions have beenmodified as of January 1, 1998, to the extent possible as permitted by PRWORA, 
in order to align the Section 1931 (b) program with C~I~RKS. Therefore, former AFDC rules will be 
referred to as the Section 1931 (b) rules. 
Assembly Bill (AB) 1107, chapter 146, Statutes of 1999, expanded the definition of the unemployed 
parent for purposes of establishing eligibility based upon deprivation of a child. Prior to this bill, if the 
principal wage earner works less than 100 hours per month, based upon the AFDC rules in effect 
July 16, 1996, or is considered unemployed under the terms of an existing federal waiver of the 
100-hour rule for recipients of the Section 1931(b) Medi-Cat program, then deprivation exists for 
purposes of the child's eligibility. j 9 
As of March 1. 2000. if the principal wage earner (PWE) is an applicant for the Section 1931(b) 
program (or if the PWE is either an applicant or a recipient in the Medically Needy (MN) program, 
helshe may work 100 hours or more if the family's net nonexempt earned income. is at or below 100 
percent of the federal poverty level (FPL). This test is called the U-Parent Earned Income Test. 
Recipients of Section 1931 (b) may continue to work 100 hours or more if they continue to meet the 
I 
Section 1931(b) program requirements except as noted in the Procedures 5C (Deprivation). 
In addition, Senate Bill (SB) 708, chaptered on July 22, 1999, raised the income limits for the 
Section 1931(b) program to 100 percent of the FPL. The effective date for both changes was 
March 1,2000. 
5, 
5 
persons applying for Medi-Cal who are not on Public Assistance (PA),-Other PA, or Pickle must first 
be evaluated for the Section 1931(b) program prior to any other full scope Medi-Cal programs. See 
Section 5C and 5s of this Manual for more information about deprivation and implementation of the 
Section 1931 (b) program. 
6. MEDI-CAL FAMILY BUDGET UNIT (MFBU) COMPOSITION RULES 
The MFBU for Section 1931(b) shall be the basic unit of persons considered in determining an 
individual's or family's eligibility. Persons eligible for Section 1931(b) have a zero share of cost (SOC). 
Note: Sneede is applicable to the Section 193 1 (b) determination. 
Pending 
SECTION NO.: 50226 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 270 DATE: 11/05/02 8G-1

[page 136]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY-PROCEDURES MANUAL 
The following are some basic Section 1931 (b) rules for the MFBU determination: t 
All persons in the family who are living in the home and who are not already receiving a cash 
grant e.g., Supplemental Security Income (SSI). CalWORKs, In-Hoq Supportive Services 
(IHSS) are evaluated for Section 1931 (b) in the same i;fi~i)~ regardless of whether or not they 
have linkage. Persons who are considered to be r,eceiving Public Assistance (PA), or Other 
PA are not in the MFBU except for those receiving Four Month Continuing and Transitional 
Medi-Cal benefits (see Section 50373 California Code of Regulationsb . Note: If a family 
member is aged, blind, disabled and in long term care (LTC), helshe is not consider to be living 
in the home, nor is helshe included in the MFBU. 
If some persons in the household are receiving CalWORKs, the remaining family members 
who are not eligible for CalWORKs or choose to not receive CalWORKs are considered to be 
eligible for Section 1931 (b) without a determination. These persons are financially eligible for 
CalWORKs and their income and property was counted in the CalWORKs determination. 
Some examples are: 1) Persons who are sanctioned from CalWORKs such as those who do 
not cooperate with work requirements, 2) fleeing felons, 3) persons who have reached their 
CalWORKs time limits, or 4) persons who do not have satisfactory immigration status. - 
The exceptions to this mle are: persons who do not meet the age requirements of a child (they 
are not under 18 or not enrolled in school and expected to graduate prior to age 19), a non- 
needy caretaker relative who was not financially eligible as a CalWORKs applicant or recipient 
and whose income and resources were not counted when determining the CalWORKs case, 
or a minor parent living with hisher parents and whose child is receiving CalWORKs, but 
helshe is not eligible due to the grandparent's incomelresources. These individuals cannot be 
assumed to be eligible for Section 1931 (b) without a determination. ,f 
-b 
Those persons who are in the same MFBU with other family members who are being evaluated for 
Section 1931(b), but are ineligible because they do not have linkage or who arern.ot eligible after a 
Sneede determination, should be evaluated for the MN, Medically Indigent (MI), or the Percent 
programs, if othewise eligible. Those persons who are eligible for Section 1931 (b) are not in the MFBU 
with those who are being evaluated for the MN or MI program. See the following examples or Article 
5K for examples of how to determine eligibility for the Percent programs. 
There must be at least one deprived child eligible5~r a Medi-Cal program with a zero SOC, 
e.g., Percent program, PA, CE, or CEC, for a parent to be linked to the Section 1931(b) 
program. --- 
Anunbom may be used to increase the Section 1931 (b) family size prior to the last four months 
of pregnancy regardless of whether the unborn is deprived if there are other deprived children 
in the family who are otherwise eligible. 
If the o& deprived child is an unborn in the last four months of pregnancy and the mother is 
being evaluated for Section 1931(b), the spouse or unmarried father is an ineligible member 
of the Section 1931(b) MFBU and is not eligible for Section 1931(b) until the birth of the 
unborn. The father should be evaluated for the MN program. Continued Eligibility and Sneede 
rules apply. The unmarried father may choose to opt out if he wishes. 
Pending 
SECTION NO.: 50226 MI\NUAL LETTER NO.: 270 DATE: 11/05/02 8G-2

[page 137]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
The stepparent may choose to apply as an essenti'al person for Section 1931 (b) if hislher 
spouse has a deprived child and the spouse wishes to apply regardless of whether or not the 
stepparent has non-deprived children. This is different from the MN program which only allows 
a stepparent with no children of hislher own in the home to be linked by a spouse who is 
incapacitated. Hislher income must be counted if hiMq pbouse is r$uesting Medi-Cal. The 
stepparent may opt out of Section 1931 (b) or the MN program if only hisher spouse's separate 
children are applying for benefits. See the special-property rules requirement described under 
Sneede property and Example C in the Procedures section 5K. Page 6. 
The Section 1931(b) MFBU rules for a non-parent caretaker are similar to those of the MN 
program. If the caretaker relative is not the parent of the child, he or she is not required to be 
in the MFBU unless he or she wishes to be aided. If a caretaker also lives with a spouse, the 
spouse may not be aided nor is the spouse's income and property counted. This is similar to 
the rule for the MN program. The spouse may be aided under the MN program if he or she 
has other linkage such as aged, blind, or disabled. See the Medi-Cal Eligibility Procedures 
Manual Article 8D for more information. 
An exception to Section 1931 (b) MFBU rules for caretaker relatives is if the non-parent relative 
is the caretaker of a child and the adult parent of that child is also living in the home. This is 
permitted under Section 1931(b) rules even tEough MN rules do not permit the caretaker 
relative to be aided when the parent is also living in the home. If an adult parent does not have 
care and control of his or-her child (but his or her parental rights have not been terminated) and 
helshe is living with a caretaker relative of the adult parent's child such as grandparent who 
does have care and control, all persons are included in the MFBU if the caretaker wishes to 
be aided. 
The minor parent who is living in the home of hislher parents must either be a deprived child 
or may request aid only for himself/herself and histher deprived child to be aided under 
Section 1931 (b) rules. In either case. the senior parent's income aid property are counted 
until the minor is an adult and they must apply for the minor parent. The Section 1931(b) 
MFBU is similar to that of the MN MFBU. If the minor mother is pregnant with no other deprived 
children, there is one MFBU. The deprived pregnant minor is an eligible member in the MFBU 
with her unborn, parents and siblings. The senior parent with no care and control of a minor 
I 
parent is an ineligible member of the Section 1931 (b) MFBU and should be evaluated for the 
MN program in an MFBU of one. 
If the minor mother has no other siblings in the household, the senior parent must have care 
and control of both the minor mother and the minor mother's child if the senior parent wishes 
to be aided. If these conditions are not met, she $an ineligible member in the minor mother's 
, MFBU for the Section 1931(b) program. If these conditions are met, there are two MFBUs for 
. the Section 1931(b) program similar to the treatment of the-minor mother and the senior 
mother under regular MN rules. The senior parent is in the first MFBU with the minor mother 
md the minor mother is an ineligible member with hislher child in the second MFBU. As in the 
MN program, the senior parent's incometproperty is never used to determine the eligibility for 
the minor parent's child. If the senior parent's incomelproperty makes the minor parent 
ineligible in the first MFBU, only the infant is potentially eligible in the second MFBU (the minor 
mother is ineligible in this MFBU). The senior parent(s) and the minor parent may be eligible 
for the MN or the Percent programs if they are not eligible for Section 1931 (b). 
s If there are siblings in the home, the senior parent, siblings, and the minor parent are in the first 
MFBU. The issue of care and control is not an issue due to CalWORKs mandatory inclusion 
rules. Sneede rules apply if the siblings or the minor has income andlor property. The minor 
mother is an ineligible member of the second MFBU with her infant. 
Pending 
SECTION NO.: 50226 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 270 DATE: 11/05/02 8G-3

[page 138]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDUFES MANUAL 
The Section 1931 (b) MFBU for married minor child and hislher spouse living with the senior 
parent(s) is similar to the MFBU used for the MN prdgram except that a minor under the MNIMI 
program is a person under 21. There may be three separate MFBYs depending on who 
wishes to be aided. See Example 18 in the Sneede ~fodedures 8F. 
Persons who are eligible for Section 1931 (b) may choose to be aided under certain other 
mandatory programs such as Pickle or a special limited benefits program such as the Qualified 
Medicare Beneficiary program, but they may not choose to be aided under the MN program 
which is an Optional federal category. 
A deprived child must live with either a parent or caretaker relative to be eligible for Section 
1931 (b). 
A child 18 years old (and not enrolled in school and expected to graduate by age 19), 19, or 
20 years old who is living in the home with a senior parent and other siblings and is considered 
an "adult" under the Section 1931(b) program rules, is an ineligible member of the Section 
1931 (b) MFBU unless helshe is a parent of a deprived child who is living in the home and could 
apply for Section 1931 (b) in a separate case reg$dless of whether hisher own and hisher 
child's income or property. are under the Section 1931 (b) limits. NOTE: A married or unmarried 
adult child between ages -1 8 to 21 who is not eligible for Section 1931 (b) because helshe has 
no deprived children or she is pregnant and is not in her last trimester and has no other born 
children is not eligible for Section 1931(b) in a separate case and is an ineligible member of 
the senior parents' MFBU. 
C. SNEEDE REQUIREMENTS 
7 
The requirements of the Sneede lawsuit apply to the Section 1931(b) determination. That is, there is 
a mandatory exception to using the modified July 16, 1996 AFDC methodology. This' exception relates 
to the Medi-Cal Sneede lawsuit which limits financial responsibility to a spouse for a spouse or a parent 
for a child. Such prohibitions did not exist in the AFDC program, but the Centers for Medicare and 
Medicaid Services indicated that Sneede must apply to the Section 1931 (b) program as it does for all 
other Medi-Cal programs. For more information on Sneede, see the Procedures 8F. 
This means that if a family is determined ineligible for Section 1931(b) rules because of excess property 
or failure to meet the income test, Sneede provisions apply if Pere is a Sneede class member. If only 
a parent is eligible for Section 1931(b) after Sneede is apfled, there must be at least one deprived 
child who is eligible for another Medi-Cal program with a zero SOC for the parent to be eligible for 
Section 193 1 (b). 
-e= 
Generally, the same Sneede methodology used in the regular Medi-Cal program is followed under 
Section 1931 (b) except for the following: 
lncome Deductions and the Personal Needs Allowance: Under regular Sneede, deductions for the 
aged, blind, and disabled are applicable. These deductions are not permitted in the Section 1931(b) 
Sneede determination. Under regular Sneede, the SOC is based on the Maintenance Need Income 
Level (MNIL) (or prorated amount), and a parental needs amount of $600 (which relates to the MNIL 
for one) is allowed for the parent before the parent allocates to others for whom that parent is 
responsible. As of March 1, 2000, Section 1931 (b), income eligibility for applicants is based on 
100 percent of the FPL (unlike the MN program). 
Pending 
SECTION NO.: 50226 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 270 DATE: 11/05/02 8G-4

[page 139]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
& 
Effective November 1, 2002, applicants receive a $240 deduction from Social Security 
Administration Social Security or private disability benefits plus the $90 deduction from eamed 
income (Alternative B). 
Recipients are allowed either the MBSAC income bpi& with the $2&+ 112 deductions 
(Alternative A) or the 100 percent limit with the $90 work expense deduction and the $240 if 
applicable. (Alternative B). As of July 1, 1999, toe parental needs allowance for Alternative A 
recipients is $389 which is $1 less than MBASC. These amounts change when the MBSAC 
and the FPL limit change. 
Each Alternative A Sneede member may receive the full $240 + 112, if applicable. Each 
Altemative B Sneede recipient with earned income will receive the $90 deduction and the $240 
if applicable, up to the amount of their eamed or disability income. This is similar to the 
Sneede rules for deductions under the MN/MI program where each Sneede member receives 
a full set of applicable deductions, e.g., the $20 any income disregard, (see Medi-Cal Eligibility 
Procedures Manual Article, 8F Page 13), except that for recipients, the $240 is applied first 
to disability and then to eamed income and the % to the remainder of earned income and the 
$240 + 112 or the $90 deduction does not require that the person with that income be a spouse 
or a parent of a disabled child. 
- 
1. Allocations from spouses or parents who have failed to qualify for Section 1931(b) due to 
Sneede or becauseof no deprivation are described below: 
Spouses (such as a father ofan unborn where there are no born children) who are 
eligible for Section 1931(b) may deduct all of their income if they are being determined 
as eligible or ineligible members of the MFBU for the Medically Needy (MN) program 
and their income was used to make their spouse eligible for Section 1931(b). 
Unmarried parents are not responsible for each other and may not deduct any income 
if the other parent is Section 1931(b) eligible. NOTE: Thme should not be many 
instances where one spouse is ineligible because spousks are in the same Mini 
Budget Unit (MBU) and will pass or fail the income and property test together and the 
stepparent can choose to be an essential person. However, the spouse may not have 
linkage when the pregnant woman has no other deprived children, is in her last four 
months, because the father is not eligible until the deprived child is born. Unmarried 
parents may not deduct any allocation to the unmarried parent of their mutual child. 
They are in separate MBUs and only keep parental needs allowance; therefore, 
unmarried parents usually pass the Section 1931 (b) income test unless they have 
separate children who are in the same budget unit. 
If only a child(ren) and/or a spouse.& Section 1931(b) eligible using either the 
Alternative A or B allocations by a parent or spouse, the parent or spouse may deduct 
the larger of either Altemative A or B allocations*when determining hislher MN 
.- 
determination. NOTE: The spouse of a pregnant woman who has no other children 
is not eligible until the deprived child is born. I 
A parent who is not eligible for Section 1931 (b) may deduct the amount of their 
parental allocation to each child if that child is Section 1931 (b) eligible when the parent 
is being determined for the MN or MI programs as an eligible or ineligible member. 
No income or Sneede allocation from any eligible Section 1931 (b) person is carried 
over to family members who did not pass Section 1931 (b). 
Pending 
SECTION NO.: 50226 + MANUAL LElTER NO.: 270 DATE: 11/05/02 8G-5

[page 140]
MEDI-CAL ELlGlBlLlN PROCEDURES MANUAL 
Children who do not pass Section 1931(b) after a Sneede determination, or do not 
meet the age limitations or deprivation requirements may not deduct any of their 
income which was used in the Section 1931 (b) determination because they are not 
responsible relatives. The children must use their-income agaR (if any), when they 
are determined for the MN or MI program. As noted above, no allocations from the 
parent in Section 1931 (b) are carried over tof them. 
Percent Programs: .. -. 2. 
When determining eligibility for the Percent programs for persons who did not pass 
Section 1931 (b) or the MNIMI program with no share of cost after Sneede rules were 
applied or who have no deprivation and are being evaluated for the Percent programs, 
follow the regular MFBU composition and income rules as described in the Medi-Cal 
Eligibility Procedures Manual Section 5K. Include the income from all responsible 
persons and compare the net nonexempt income to the income limit for the entire 
family size except when a person is allowed to opt out and is not part of the MFBU 
such as when: 
- 
(a) Only the spouse's separate children wish to be aided or, 
(b) The unmarried father does not wish to be aided with his pregnant girlfriend and 
he has no other born children living in the home. 
3. Property exception: The property limits under Section 1931 (b) and Sneede are the same as 
under the MN program with the exception of a single adult which has a limit of $3000. 
Note: If the husband and the husband's separate child choose not to be aided, his separate 
plus one-half of the community property are exempt under the Section 19+%(b) program. This 
exemption for property occurs even though his wife is requesting benefit& This rule does not 
apply to income. Income from the stepparent is counted unless only the M;ife's separate 
children are applying. If the husband's separate child wants benefits, then the husband is 
considered a parent and the stepparent exemption does not apply. More infbrmation about 
Section 1931 (b) property rules are described in ACWDLs 98-43, 99-02, 99-03, 99-20,01-53, 
and 01-62 and will be discussed in future Procedures. 
D. MFBU EXAMPLES (Assume all persons are property eligible) 
P 
Example 1: (Some Family Members Receive CalWORKs) 
74 
Father and two children age six and eight are receiving Medi-Cal through C~IWORKS. Mother is not eligible 
for CalWORKs because she does not meet the other CalWORKs requirements such as work, citizenship or 
time limits. Oldest child is not eligible for CalWORKs because he is age 20. 
CalWORKs 
Father 
Child #1 
Child #2 
1931(b) 
Mother 
<20 Year Old> 
There is no income or property determination required for the mother because she is presumed eligible for 
Section 1931 (b) because the other family members are receiving CalWORKs. The 20-year-old is only shown 
in her budget unit to be consistent with the other examples, but no actual computation is required. The 20 year 
old is in his own budget unit for the MNiMI because he is not eligible for Section 1931 (b) because he is over 
Pending 
SECTION NO.: 50226 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 270 DATE: 11 /05/02 8G-6

[page 141]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEPURES MANUAL 
-- -- 
the age limit. No income or property from other family members are used to determine his eligibility. 
Example 2: (Family Members Who are Not Eligible for section 1931(b) Due to Age) 
,y . P 
A father and two children age six and eight were receiving C~IW~RKS. His spouse was not eligible for 
CalWORKs because she did not participate in the CalWORKs Gork requirements and was receiving Medi-Cal 
under the Section 1931(b) program. The oldest child was not eligible for CalWORKs because he is age 20. The 
father and the two younger children have now been terminated from CalWORKs because of an increase in 
earnings from employment. Reevaluate the entire family for Section 1931(b). As of March 1, 2000 all are 
considered recipients, even if the 20 year old was not receiving CalWORKs or Section 1931(b) in the first month 
of eligibility. 
Father 20-year-old 
Child #1 ($) 
Child #2 
Mom 
c20-year-old> .< 
, . 
Mother can be considered for 1931(b) because there are no work requirements for this program. The 
20-year-old is included as an ineligible member of the Section 1931(b) MFBU, but also evaluated under regular 
Medi-Cal in hislher own MFBU. If the rest of the family is eligible for Section 1931 (b), they may continue to 
receive zero SOC Medi-Cal under this program. Should they later be terminated for an increase in earnings, 
they would be eligible for Transitional Medi-Cal; however, the 20 year old would not. 
Example 3: (Applicant Family - Sneede 8 Poverty Level Programs Apply) ;J'S 
i 
The family described above are applying as applicants after not receiving Medi-Ca! or CalWORKs for six 
months. They are not eligible for 1931 (b) using applicant (Alternative B) income limits (100 percent with $90 
deductions). Sneede rules apply because Child #1 has income. In this case everyone except the 20 year old 
and Child #1 are found to be eligible for 1931 (b) after the Sneede determination. 
Father 
Child #2 
Mom 
Child #1 ($) . 
~20-year-old? . _ 
Sneede 
MBU#l 
Father 
Mom :J=' 
Child #2 -- 
~20-year-old> 
MBU#2 
Child #1 ($) 
Child #1 would be evaluated with the 20-year-old under the MN program. Sneede would apply if they have an 
SOC. 
20-year-old 
Child #I ($) 
Sneede MNIMI) 
MBU #1 MBU#2 
20-year-old Child #1($) 
These children have a SOC 20-year-old has no SOC Child #l has a SOC 
Pending 
SECTION NO.: 50226 5. MANUAL LETTER NO.: 270 DATE: 11/05/02 8G-7

[page 142]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
Poverty Level Program 
.y . - '9 
All family members are included in the poverty level determination fpr child#l. Compare the net nonexempt 
income of the responsible relatives to the poverty limit for five. If child #2 or the 20-year-old had income, their 
income would not be used, but the family size would remain the same. 
<Father> 
<Child #2> 
<Mom> 
Child #I ($) 
<20-year-old> 
Assume Child #1 is eligible. The Section 1931(b) family members are considered recipients in the following 
month. The family should be redetermined as recipients to see if Child #1 is now be eligible for Section 1931 (b) 
using Alternative A limits and deductions. The 20 year old is still ineligible. 
Example 4: (Stepparent with Separate and Non-Deprived Mutual Children) 
. > 
Husband and wife with separate and Go mutual children apply for Medi-Cal. This family was not terminated 
from CalWORKs or Section 1931(b) in the last four months; therefore, they are treated as applicants. The 
children have no income. The wife is the principal wage earner, is employed over 100 hours and the family's 
earned income is above the Unemployed Parent income limit (100 percent of the FPL); therefore, the mutual 
children are ineligible for Section 1931 (b) because they are not deprived. Since the separate children are 
deprived due to an absent parent, only the mutual children have no linkage. , 
L , 
1931 (b) Sneede Sneede Sneede 
Husband MBU #1 MBU #2 MBU #2 
Wife Husband 
<Mutual Children> Wife Mom's Child Dad's Child 
Wife's Separate Child <Mutual Children> 
Husband's Separate Child 
The family is evaluated for Section 1931 (b) and is over the applicant income limit. Sneede rules apply. Assume 
MBU#1 passes. Evaluate the separate children for the MN or ~erc-dt programs if they have a SOC. Evaluate 
the mutual childcen for the MI program. If the children have a SOC in the MNIMI program after applying Sneede 
rules, they would .be evaluated for the Percent program using the responsible relative's family's income in the 
MFBU. Compare the income limit to the poverty limit for a family size of six. If the parents have no mutual or 
separate child eligible for a program with zero SOC, they are not be eligible for the Section 1931 (b) program 
. and should be evaluated for the MN program. 
Note: If the stepparent had no separate child in the household or that child did not request aid, the stepparent 
could be linked as an essential person for Section 1931(b), but not for the MN program. His income must be 
included if his spouse is requesting benefits even if he does not wish to be aided. See Example 7. 
MN Proqram MI Prosram 
Separate Children Mutual Children 
Pending 
SECTION NO.: 50226 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 270 DATE: 1 1 /05/02 8G-8

[page 143]
MEDI-CAL ELlGlBlLlrY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
i 
Example 5: (Only the Separate Children of a Parent in a Stepparent Household Apply) 
If only the separate children of a parent wish to be aided, Section 1931 (4) uses th same rules as the MN/MI 
$b program. Only the separate children and their ineligible parent areyin'the MFBU. llow the procedures as 
described in Article 5K Example C, or Article 8F Example 10: however, use the Section 1931 (b) income 
deductions, parental needs allowance, and income limits. The ineligible wife is allowed to allocate to her spouse, 
separate child, and any non-deprived mutual children which reduces her total income. The allocation to her 
spouse and any mutual children are deducted from the net non-exempt income (net balance available to the 
MFBU from Mom). This balance plus any income from the separate children are compared to the limit for a 
family size of those in the budget unit only. If the separate children are ineligible for Section 1931(b) and are 
eligible as MN's with a SOC, determine eligibility for the Percent program and compare the parent and her 
children's income to the limit for only the ineligible parent and her separate children. 
<Mom> (Net income minus deductions and allocations to spouse and mutual children) 
Mom's separate Children 
% 
Example 6: (Sneede Case - Child with lncome is only Eligible For Percent Program) 
A single mother and her nine month-old child with income apply for Medi-Cal. The mother has net nonexempt 
income of $889 and the child has net nonexempt income of $620. The county determines Section 1931 (b) and 
then applies Sneede because the family is over the Section 1931 (b) April 1, 2000 limit. 
Section 1931(b) MFBU 
Mother $ 889 
Child $ 620 
Total $1,509 
Sneede 
MBU No. 1 
Sneede 
MBU No. 2 
Mother $696 Child $620 + ${93 from Mother 
Total $696 Total $813 
Limit $696 Limit $469 
Limit (2) $ 938 
The mother passes Section 1931(b) because she keeps her parental needs amount of $696 and allocates the 
remainder to her child; however, the child is above the prorated Sneede 100% limit. The county then evaluates 
the child for the MN program. Since the child has a SOC, he or she is evaluated for the 200 Percent program. 
There are no health premiums to add back. 
Child $626. 
Total $620 
Limit $600 
200 Percent Prooramd9 
Mother's Income $ 889 -- 
Child's lncome $ 620 
Total $1,509 
Limit (2) $1,875 (April 2000) 
Child is eligible for the 200 Percent program. Mom is eligible for Section 1931 (b) because she has a child who 
is eligible for Medi-Cal with no SOC. The child may be eligible as a recipient the following month if Mom has 
earned income using Alternative A. 
Example 7: (Married Couple, Mutual and Separate Children, and a 20 Year Old) 
Married parents apply for Medi-Cal for themselves, their two mutual children and the mother's two separate 
children, one of which is a 20-year-old child. The mother's net nonexempt earned income is $1 000 and the 
father's net nonexempt unearned income is $589. The mother's 20-year-old has net nonexempt earned income 
Pending 
SECTION NO.: 50226 * MANUAL LElTER NO.: 270 DATE: 11 /05/02 8G-9

[page 144]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
of $500. The principal wage earner works 100 hours or more and the family pass the earned income U-parent 
test so there is deprivation for their mutual children. 
. . 
Section 1931 (b) MFBU 
Mother 
Father 
Mutual Child no. 1 
Mutual Child no. 2 
Mother's 1 0-Year-Old 
<Mother's 20-Year-Old> 
Total 
Limit for 6 
$ 1000 
$ 589 
0 
0 
0 
$ 500 
$2,089 
$1,905 (April 2000) 
Since the family is over the Section 1931(b) 100% 4/1/00 FPL limit and there are Sneede class members, 
Sneede rules apply. The Section 1931(b) Sneede parental needs amount at this time is $696. The mother 
keeps $696 and allocates $304 t 5 =$60.80 The father keeps $589 because he has less than the parental 
needs limit. 
MBU No. 1 Sneede 
Mother $696 . I-. $696.00 
Father $589 + $60.80from Mother $649.80 
Mutual Child no. 1 $60.80 from Mother _ $ 60.80 
Mutual Child no. 2 $60.80 from Mother $ 60.80 
Total $1467-40 
Limit $1421 -00 
The mother, father, and mutual children are not eligible for Section 1931(b). The mother, father, and the mutual 
children should be evaluated for the MN program. r 
1' 
MBU No. 2 
Sneede 
MBU No. 3 
Sneede 
Mother's 10-year-old = $0 +$60.80(from Mother) < 20-Year-Old> = $500 + $60.80 from Mother 
Total $60.80 Total $560.80 
Limit $469.00 Limit $469.00 
Mother's 10-year-old is eligible for 1931 (b) This child is not eligible fo7-1931 (b) because he/she 
is over the age limit. 
The income of the 20-year-old is used again because children areht responsible relatives. If a mutual child 
in MBU No. 1 had his or her own income, it also would be used again. 
. - 
Father $ 589 
Mother $ 1000- $60.80 allocated to 10 year old 
Mutual Child No. 1 $0 
Mutual Child No. 2 $0 
Mother's 20-Year-Old $ 500 
Total $ 2028.20 
Limit $ 1259.00 
These family members are over the limit. Sneede rules would apply. Those children who did not pass would 
be evaluated for the Percent program. NOTE: If Sneede applies to a MN/MI budget unit and there are no 
parents in the MFBU because they were eligible for Section 1931 (b), the child(ren) in the MBU receive a full 
Pending 
SECTION NO.: 50226 MNUAL LE-TTER NO.: 270 DATE: 1 1 /05/02 8G-10

[page 145]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
! 
standard of need rather than a prorated income/property limit similar to when a parent is PA or other PA. 
In month two, redetermine the family as recipients using Alternative A and the $240+1/2 disregards. 
Example 8: (Employed Unmarried Parents with Mutual and Separate Children) 
,Y ,. .' s, 
Unmarried parents apply for Medi-Cal for themselves and their Go mutual children and the mother's two 
separate children, one of which is a 20-year-old child. The mother's net nonexempt income is $600 and the 
father's net nonexempt income is $896. Both are employed but the family's earned income is below the 100% 
limit for the U-Parent test; therefore, there is deprivation for their mutual children. The mother's 20-year-old has 
uneamed net nonexempt income of $500. 
Section 1931 (b) MFBU 
Mother $ 600 
Father. $ 896 
Mutual Child #1 0 
Mutual Child #2 0 
Mother's 10-Year-Old 0 
<Mother's 20-Year-Old> $ 500 
Total - $1,996 w 
Limit $1,905 (April 2000) 
Since the family is over the Section 1931 (b) April 1,2000 limit and there are Sneede class members, Sneede 
rules apply. The Section 1931(b) Sneede parental needs amount for applicants at this time is $696. The mother 
keeps $600 and allocates nothing because she has less than $696. The father keeps $696 and allocates $200 
+ 2 = $100 (mutual children #1 and #2). 
MBU No. 1 MBU No. 2 MBU 3 MBU 4 
Sneede Sneede Sneede ,, 
X 
Mother $600 Father $696 Mutual Child #1 $100 (father) <20 Year Old>$500 
Mother's 10 Year Old Q Limit $696 Mutual Child #2 $100 (father) Lknit $469 
Total $600 Total $200 
Limit $938 Limit $71 1 
All are eligible except the 20 year old. Evaluate him for the MN program. 
MN MFBU 
Mother's 20-Year-Old $ 500 
Total $ 500 
Limit $ 600 
The 20-year-OM-is eligible for the MN program. 
Example 9: (Married Recipients Terminated from CalWORKs) 
An incapacitated married father with $600 gross eamed income, his spouse with $1000 gross uneamed income 
which is not disability income, and their two children are terminated from CalWORKs due increased uneamed 
income. One of the children has gross earned income of $50 which is not exempt. This family is considered 
recipients for the Section 1931(b) determination. Recipients must be determined for Section 1931(b) by either 
Alternative A or I3 depending on which is the most beneficial. The County uses Alternative B first, since the 
family has more unearned income. 
Pending 
SECTION NO.: 50226 , MANUAL LETTER NO.: 270 DATE: 11/05/02 8G-11

[page 146]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
1931 (b) MFBU Usinq Alternative B (1 00 Percent) 
Father $ 600 -$90 = $510 net earned income .? .,;- a 
Mother $1,000 net nonexempt unearned income 
Child #I $ 50 -$90 = $0 net nonexempt earned income * 
Child #2 K.22 
Total $1,510 
Limit (4) $1,421 
Sneede Rules apply because the family is over the April 1,2000 Section 1931(b) limit and there are Sneede 
class members. Note: In this example, we will proceed to Sneede because the family has more unearned 
income; however, counties may wish to redetermine the family using Alternative A and do the Sneede 
determination only if the family fails both Alternatives. Mother keeps the parental allocation of $696 and 
divides the remainder of $304 by 3 = $101.33. 
MBU #1 Sneede MBU#2 
Mother $696 (Parental Needs) Child #I($) O+$lOl 
Father $510 +$I01 (Mother) Total $101 
Child #2 $101 (Mother) ' - Limit $393 
Total $1408 
$1108 
- 
Limit (3) 
Child #I is eligible in MBU #2. None of the family members in MBU #1 are eligible using Alternative B. 
Evaluate them using Alternative A. 
1931 (b) MFBU Usinn Alternative A (MBASC) ; 
Father $ 600 gross earned income 
Child #1 $ 50 gross earned income 
Minus $240+1/2= $205 net earned income 
Mother $1,000 gross unearned income 
Child #2 l'i.-s 
Total $1,205 
Limit (4) $ 942 
4 
Sneede Rules bpply. Mother keeps the parental allocation of $389 and divides the remainder of $61 1 by 3 = 
$203.66. -- 
MBU #1 - MBU#2 
Sneede 
Mother $389.00 (Parental Needs) Child #1($) $50- $240+ 1/2+ 203.66 
Father $600.00 - $240+ % +203.66 (Mother) Total $203.66 
Child #2 $203.66 (Mother) Limit $265 
Total $976.32 
Limit (3) $793 
None of the persons in MBU #1 pass using either Alternative A or B. They are not eligible for Four Month 
Continuing Medi-Cal or the Transitional Medi-Cal programs. Evaluate them for the MN program. The mother 
may deduct the larger of the two Alternative allocations to Child #1 who is eligible for Section 1931 (b) in MBU 
#2 since Child #1 was eligible for Section 1931 (b) using both Alternatives. 
Pending 
SECTION NO.: 50226 MANUAL LElTER NO.: 270 DATE: 11 /05/02 8G-12

[page 147]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
MN MFBU 
Mother $796.34 ($1,000 - $203.66 allocation to Child #1) Net unearned inco e 
Father $51 0 Net nonexempt earned income .# ., ; 
Child #2 0 (No allocation is carried over from Mother) 
F 
Total $1306.34 
Limit 934. 
Mother and Father have a SOC of $372. Child #2 (age 3) should be evaluated for the 133 Percent program 
using the total family size but not the income of Child #I. 
133 Percent proqram 
Mother $1,000 
Father $ ,510 
Child #l NIA 
Child #2 0 
Total $1,510 
Limit $1,890 (April 2000) 
Child #I is eligible for the 133 Perkent program based on the April 1, 2000 FPL limits. 
Example 10: (Married Pregnant Woman with NO-other Children) 
A married pregnant adult woman with no other children in her last four months of pregnancy and the 
unemployed father of the unborn are applying for Medi-Cal. ,Dad has $700 in net nonexempt income. 
Section 1931 (b) MFBU 
Mom $0 
Unborn $0 
<Dad> $700 
Total $700 
Limit for 3 $1,180 
MN Proaram , r \ 
i 
Dad $0 
Total s.-J 
i 
MNL Limit $600 
Mom is eligible for 1931(b) using the April I, 2000 limits. Dad is only eligible for the MN program. His income 
is not carried over to the MN program because he is a financially responsible relative to Mom and his income 
was used to make Mom eligible. Once the baby is born, he mayge added to the Section 1931(b) program with 
no determination if there is no change in the family income. If t&family income increases, a new determination 
is required." -- 
NOTE: If the parents of the unborn were unmarried and there are no born mutual children, this example would 
be similar to themarried example above. Dad would be an ineligible MFBU member until the baby is born or 
may opt out for the first year as in the MN program unless the mother continues to request Medi-Cal after the 
postpartum period. Deprivation would still need to be established. Sneede would apply if his income caused 
Mom to be ineligible for Section 1931 (b). Section 1931 (b) rules will remain the same for the unmarried parent 
of the unborn with or without separate children of the mother. If Mom and the unborn are eligible for Section 
1931(b), Dad may not deduct his income in the MN determination because unmarried parents are not 
responsible for one another. NOTE: The baby is protected from income increases until age one because of 
the Continued Eligibility program. 
Pending 
SECTION NO.: 50226 , MANUAL LETTER NO.: 270 DATE: 11 /05/02 8G-13 
f 
.... . . - -. .. .- . -. . .. .. .- -.... .. .... .... ... . .. . . .. .. . .. . . .. . . .. .__ _ __ _________ ___ ____ ___ _ _ __.___ ________

[page 148]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
Example 11: (Recipient Stepparent Household with Separate and Mutual Children) 
A married woman lives with her separate child, her spouse and thkir mutual child. All were receiving Section 
1931 (b). Mom is now pregnant and Dad's income has increased. Sin, e,Dad has thqmost income and it is 
earned income, Alternative A is used. After the $240 and '/r deducti62 tiis net nonexempt income is $800. 
Mom's child has $300 net nonexempt unearned income which is not disability income. The family fails the 
Section 1931(b) income test. Sneede Rules Apply. Dad keeps $389 and allocates the remainder to Mom and 
his mutual child ($205.50). Mom's separate child keeps $300 of hislher own. All are eligible for Section 1931 (b) 
based on the current limits. 
Section 1931 (b) MFBU Section 1931 (b) Sneede Determination 
Mom $ 0 MBU #I MBU #2 
Unborn $ 0 
Mom's Child $ 300 Mom $205.50 Mom's Child $300 
Mutual Child $ 0 Dad $389.00 Total - $300 
Dad $ 800 Mutual Child $205.50 Limit $320 
Total $1,100 Unborn 
Total 
lL-3 
Limit for 5 $1,074 $800.00 
- Limit for 4 $942.00 G 
NOTE: There is no limit to the number of hours that a recipient may work if helshe has already been established 
as the PWE and there is no "break in aid". The spouse's income is counted regardless of whether or not helshe 
wishes to be aided if the spouse andlor mutual children are requesting aid which is similar to the MNIMI and 
Percent programs. If any family member fails to pass Section 1931 (b), Alternative B should be applied, before 
or after Sneede, if there are Sneede class members. If an MBU fails to pass, those persons should be 
evaluated for TMC. If Mom's separate child were not eligible for Section 1931(b) after the Sneede process, 
he or she would be evaluated for the MN program using only his or her income. If there were a parental 
allocation under Sneede, it is NOT carried over. If the child has a SOC, then he or shd~hould be evaluated 
for the poverty level programs, using only Mom's full net non-exempt income and his or h%r oy. Compare this 
amount to the full family size of five. 
Example 12: (Applicant Minor Parent, Siblings, Senior Parents) 
A deprived minor parent and siblings apply based on the senior parent's unemployment. The minor parent's 
child is de rived through absence. Senior Dad has $2,000 per month net nonexempt unearned income. The 
minor mot R er has no income. 
Section 1931 (b) MFBU#l Section 1931 (b) MFBU#2 
Senior Mom 
Senior Dad 
Minor Mom 
Sibling #I 
Sibling #2 
Total 
- - 
Limit (5) 
$0 
Total $0 
Limit (2) -*$938 
Only the infant is eligible for Section 1931 (b) using the April 1, 2000 limits. The other family members in the 
first MFBU should be evaluated for the MN or the Percent programs. 
Example 13: (Minor Child, Infant and Boyfriend Living with Senior Parents) 
The 16-year-old minor mother and her 17-year-old unemployed boyfriend who is the parent of her child live with 
her senior parents. The parents are not applying for Medi-Cal nor do they have care and control of the minor 
mother; however, they are financially responsible for the minor mother and should complete the Statement of 
Facts. The minor is linked because her infant is deprived. We will assume that there is no in-kind income to 
Pending 
SECTION NO.: 50226 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 270 DATE: 1 1 /05/02 8G-14

[page 149]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
the boyfriend. Senior Mom has $3,090 in earned income. Dad has $50 unearned income. Use Alternative B 
and the $90 deduction for earned income. 
Section 1931 (b) MFBU #1 Section 1931 (b) MFBU #2 
-Y ,> ,' '9 
<Senior Mom> $3,000 net nonexempt <Minor Mom> $0 
<Senior Dad> $ 50 net nonexempt Minor pad $0 
Minor Mom 0 Infant $0 
$3,050 Total $0 Total 
Limit (3) $1,180 (April 2000) 
All the persons in MFBU No. 1 are ineligible based on the April 1,2000 Section 1931 (b) limits. The minor Mom 
should be evaluated for the MI program. She has no deprivation to be aided as an MN although care and control 
is not an issue for the MN program. Her parents are ineligible members. If she has a SOC, evaluate her for 
the 100 Percent program. The minor Dad and the infant are eligible for Section 1931(b). NOTE: Since these 
are two separate MFBU's MFBU #1 cannot be redetermined using recipient rules in month two. 
MI MFBU #1 
<Senior Mom> $3,090 (-$go = $3000) net nonexem@ 
<Senior Dad> $ 50 net nonexempt 
Minor Mom $ 0. 1 
Total $3,090 
$ 934 Limit 
SOC $2,156 
Minor Mom has a SOC for the MI program because she is not eligible for the 100 Percent program ($1,180) 
using April 1, 2000 FPL limits. 
1, 
EXAMPLE 14: ( Senior Parent Applying for Pregnant Minor and her Unborn) i 
Pregnant minor, age 17, and senior mother apply for Medi-Cat. If the senior mother applies for herself and her 
child, it is assumed that she has care and control. Otherwise, she would be an ineligible member of the MFBU. 
There is no senior father in the home. There are no other siblings in the household. The senior mother has 
net nonexempt income of $700 per month. The minor has $50 net nonexempt income per month. 
Section 1931 (b) MFBU 
Senior mother $700 
Minor Mother $50 
Unborn NIA 
Total Income $750 
Limit (3) $1,180 
All are eligible based on the April 1, 2000 limits. Assume the baby is born. If the senior mother does not have 
care and control of both the minor and her baby, she becomes an ineligible member of the MFBU. The senior 
mother can apply for the MN program in an MFBU by herself (similar to what would occur if the minor mother 
were receiving CalWORKs). 
Section 1931 (b) MFBU#1 Section 1931 (b) MFBU#2 MN Proqram 
<Senior Mother> $700 <Minor Mother> $50 
Minor Mother Infant 
Total 
$0 
Total $750 $50 
Limit $938 Limit $938 
Senior Mother !jXJ 
Limit $600 
Pending 
SECTION NO.: 50226 a MANUAL LETTER NO.: 270 DATE: 11 /05/02 8G-15

[page 150]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
Senior mother may deduct all her income in the MN program determination because it was used to make the 
minor mother eligible. She is eligible for no SOC. NOTE: When the minor turns 18 and is not enrolled in 
school, the senior mother is no longer included in the Section 1931'(b) MFBU with the daughter. The senior 
mother may continue to be aided in the MN program using her daughter,as linkage if s@ is otherwise eligible 
until the minor reaches age 21. The daughter and grandchild are not in th8 MFBU with the senior mother as long 
as they remain eligible for Section 1931(b). This is similar to the budget unit composition if the daughter and 
grandchild were eligible for CalWORKs. 
Example 15: (Senior Parent with Care and Control of a Deprived Minor and Infant) 
Same scenario above, but the senior has care and control of both the minor and the infant and the senior's 
income or property made the minor mother ineligible. Use Alternative B (100 percent of the FPL) for applicants. 
Section 1931 (b) MFBU #1 Section 1931 (b) MFBU #2 
Senior mother $1,700 
Minor mother $ 50 
Total $1,750 
Limit (2) $ 938 
<Minor mother> $50 
Infant 0 
Total 
Limit 
$50 
$938 
. . .. 
.P 
The infant is eligible in MFBU #2 based on April 1, 2000 limits. Sneede rules apply to MFBU #l. Mother keeps 
$696 and allocates the remainder of'$I&M to the minor. 
Section 1931 (b) MBU#1 Section 1931 (b) MBU#2 
Senior mother $696 parental needs 
Limit $696 
Minor mother $50 + $1004 
Total $1054 
Limit $469 , , 
The senior mother is potentially eligible for Section 1931(b) if the minor has no SOC. ?he minor mother is 
ineligible for Section 1931 (b) based on April 1, 2000 limits . Evaluate the minor mother for the MN program. 
MN MFBU 
Minor Mom 0 (Minor mother's income was used to make her infant eligible above) 
Total $5 
Limit $600 
Minor mother is eligible for the MN program with no SOC; therefordhe senior mother is eligible. If the minor 
had a SOC, both-should be evaluated for the MN program and the minor for the Percent program if she has a 
SOC as an MN. lir month two, determine family as recipients using Alternative A;-if any income is earned. 
Example 16: (Recwient Senior Parent with Care and Control, Adult Parent, and Adult Parent's Child) 
A 26-year-old adult parent who does not have care and control of her minor child lives with her minor child and 
her mother (grandmother of the child). The grandmother has care and control of the minor child. All are being 
redetermined as recipients after being terminated from CalWORKs. Under the Section 1931(b) program, a 
caretaker relative with care and control of a child may be aided even if the adult parent is in the home. If the 
MFBU has excess income or property, modified Sneede rules apply and only the income and propew of the 
parent is allocated to the child. (See Sneede Procedures 8F Example 18 on the married minor child living with 
the senior parent.) If the grandmother is ineligible, helshe is not eligible under the MN program if the adult 
parent is being aided in Section 1931(b) with the parent's child. The MN program does not allow a caretaker 
to be aided if the adult parent of a minor child is living in the home. Since the family has earned income, they 
will be evaluated first under Alternative A. 
Pending 
SECTION NO.: 50226 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 270 DATE: 11/05/02 8G-16

[page 151]
MEDI-CAL ELlGlBlLllY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
Section 1931(b) MFBU 
Grandmother $620 net nonexempt unearned income 
Adult Parent $500- $240+1/2= $130 net nonexempt earned income 
Child 3U ,d . ,, . k 
Total $750 
Limit (3) $793 All are eligible for Section 1931 (b) based on April 1, 2001 limits. 
Example 17: (Recipient Senior Parent with Care and Control, Adult Parent, and Adult Parent's Child) 
Same example as 16; however, the adult parent has $1500 gross earned income using Alternative A which 
makes the family ineligible for Section 1931 (b). 
Section 1931 (b) MFBU MBSAC 
Grandmother $ 620 net nonexempt unearned income 
Adult Parent $1,500 -($240+1/2) =$630 net nonexempt earned-income 
Child L-Q 
Total $1,250 
$ 793 - Limit (3) - - 
Alternative B should now be applied using the $90 and the 100% FPL limit to determine if this method would 
be more beneficial. Note: If Grandmother had certain types of disability income, the $240 would also apply. The 
Sneede computation is postponed pending the results of the Alternative B (100% FPL) determination. 
Section 1931 (b) MFBU 
Grandmother $ 620 net nonexempt unearned income 
Adult Parent $1,500- $90 = $1410 net nonexempt earned income f, 
Child &.J i 
Total $2,030 
Limit (3) $1,180 
i 
The family is still ineligible based on the April 1, 2000 limits. Apply Sneede rules for ~lternative A. 
Section 1931 (b) Sneede MBU#1 Section 1931 (b) Sneede MBtk#2 
Grandmother $620 net nonexempt uneamed Adult Parent $1 500-($240+1/2)=$630 
Total $620 Child 9 $0 
Limit (1) $390 Total -4 $630 
Limit for (2) $639 -.. 
The adult parent and child in MBU#2 are eligible for Section 1931 (b). Determine Sneede MBU #I again using 
Alternative B income limits. No $90 deduction is allowed because Grandmother's income is unearned. No 
aged, blind, or disabled MN deductions are allowed under the Section 1931 (b) program. The $240 deduction 
for certain types of disability income is not applicable. 
Section 1931 (b) Sneede MBU#1 
Grandmother $620 net nonexempt unearned income 
Total $620 
Limit (1) $696 
Grandmother is eligible. Note: If Grandmother were not eligible, she could not be aided in the MN program 
unless she has linkage of her own such as aged, blind, or disabled because the MN program does not allow 
Pending 
SECTION NO.: 50226 - MANUAL LETTER NO.:270 DATE: 11/05/02 8G-17

[page 152]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL . 
a caretaker relative to be aided if there is a parent living in the home regardless of who has care and control. 
If she were terminated from CalWORKs because the family's earniqgs were from employment and they had 
received CalWORKs for three of the last six months, she would be eligible for TMC. 
6. 
Example 18: (20 Year Old Parent Living with Her Child and senior'ba&nts) 
A 20-year-old parent has care and control of her two year old child, lives with her senior parents, and all are 
requesting Medi-Cal as applicants. There is absent parent deprivation for the two year old child. The 20-year-old 
is considered an adult in the Section 1931(b) determination. The senior parents are not in the Section 1931(b) 
MFBU because they are not caretaker relatives of a Section 1931(b) child. 
Section 1931 (b) MFBU 
20-Year-Old Parent $900-$90=$910 net nonexempt earned income 
20-Year-Old Parent's Child 
Total $91 0 
Limit (2) $938 (April 2000) 
The 20-year-old parent and her child are eligible for Section 1931(b) based on the April 1, 2001 limits. The 
senior parents may be aided under the MN program until the "miffbr" parent is age 21 if the 20-year-old is 
deprived by the senior parent's incapscity.or unemployment and they are otherwise eligible. The 20-year-old 
is not in the MFBU with the senior parenfs. 
MN MFBU 
Senior Parents 
Same scenario, except the 20-yearsld applicant has more earned income. 
Section 1931 (b) MFBU 
20-Year-Old Parent $1,090-$90=$1,000 net nonexempt earned income 
20-Year-Old Parent's Child $ 0 
Total $1,000 
Limit $ 938 (April 2000) 
The 20-year-old and her child are not eligible for Section 1931 (b) based on the April 1, 2000 limits. All family 
members may be evaluated for the MN program following the other MN/MI MFBU rules since the 20 
year old is still considered a child. Assume the senior parent 
Senior Dad $--650 net unearned income <20-year-old Parent> $1,000 net earned income 
Senior Mom $ 0 income 20-year-old Parent's Child 
20-year-old Parent $1,000 net eamed income Total $1,000 
Total $1,650 Limit $ 750 
Limit $ 934 
The senior parents and the 20 year old have a SOC of $716. Redetermine MFBU#1 using Sneede rules. Mom 
and Dad are eligible with no SOC. The 20-year old parent has a $688 SOC. Evaluate the two year old child for 
the 133 percent program using only the income of her 20 year old parent ($1 000) with a family size of two. The 
two year old is eligible for the 133 percent program. If there is no deprivation for the 20-year-old she may be 
eligible for the MI program and the senior parents are ineligible members of the MFBU unless they are aged, 
blind, or disabled. 
Pending 
SFCTION NO.: 50226 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 270 DATE: 11/05/02 8G-18 
. . . . . . . . . . . . - - . - . . .-

[page 153]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEPURES MANUAL 
Example 19: (Essential Person) 
Married couple with no mutual children apply for Medi-Cat. The wife has a separate child. The stepfather 
requests to be aided as essential person. He may not opt out be,yuse his wife bnts to be aided; however, 
he can be an ineligible member of the MFBU if he does not want to be aided. The wife has no income. The 
child has net income of $100. The stepfather has $2,000 net nonexempt income per month. 
Section 1931 (b) MFBU 
Stepfather $2,000 
Mother $0 
Separate Child $ 100 
Total $2,100 
Limit $1,180 (April 2000) 
Since the family is ineligible for Section 1931(b) based on the April 1, 2000 limits, Sneede rules apply. The 
stepfather keeps $696 and allocates the remainder to his wife = $1,304. The mother has no income and 
allocates nothing to her child. 
Section 1931 (b) Sneede MFBU#1 Section 19XA (b) Sneede MFBU #2 
Stepfather $ 696 . - Separate Child $100 
Mother $1,304 Total $100 
Total $2,000 Limit $469 
Limit $ 938 
The child is eligible; however, the mother and stepfather are not eligible for Section 1931(b) and should be 
evaluated for the MN and county programs. The stepfather is not eligible for the MN program as an essential 
person. NOTE: He may only be aided as an MN if his wife is incapacitated since has no deprived child. 
MN 
's - 
1 
<Stepfather> $2,000 I 
Mother 0 
Total $2,000 
Limit $ 934 - 
The mother has a share of cost of $1,066. Redetermine case as recipients in month two using Alternative A, 
if family has earned income. 
.cY 
Example 20: (Spouse in Long Term Care) 
-,* 
Mother is disabled and in long term care. She is in her own MFBU. Father and their mutual two children 
apply for MediXal. Mom allocates $400 to her husband. Each child receives $200 from Social Security. 
The father has $890 gross eamed income. 
Section 1931 (b) MFBU 
Father $1,200 ($400 from Mom + $890-$90) 
Child #I $ $ 200 
Child #2 $ $ 200 
Total $1,600 
Limit $1,180 
Pending 
SECTION NO.: 50226 - MANUAL LETTER NO.: 270 DATE: 11/05/02 8G-19

[page 154]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
The father and the children are ineligible for Section 1931 (b) as applicants based on the April 1, 2000 limits. 
Sneede rules apply. The Father keeps $696 and allocates the remainder to his children ($252). . .. 
Father $696 
Total $696 
Limit $696 
Child #l $200+$252 Child #2 $200 +$252 
Total $452 'Total $452 
Limit $469 Limit $469 
All are eligible for Section 1931 (b). Note: If Mom allocates income to children who had no other income, that 
would also become a Sneede case. 
Example 21: (Married Applicants and Children with Earned and Unearned income) 
Married parents with two mutual children (assume Dad is incapacitated) are applying for Medi-Cal. Mom earns 
$800/month and the father receives $200/month in Social Security disability income. Child #1 (who is 17 and 
not in school) has eamings of $300/month. Child #2 has $450 in uneamed income which is not disability based. 
Section 1931 (b) applicants are not currently allowed the $240 + 112 deduction.. Therefore, the father's $200 
disability income and Child #2's income results in the family having $600 ($Dad's $200 + Child # 2's $400) in 
net uneamed income. Subtract the $90 work expense deduction from Mom's earning and Child #l's earnings, 
leaving Mom with $710 in net eamings and Child #1 with $210 in n"et earnings. Add these two amounts together 
to get the family's total net earnings: $920. Add the family's total net earnings ($920) and the family's total net 
uneamed income ($600) together to get the family's total net nonexempt income: $1.520. Compare this to the 
April 1,2000, Section 1931 Program income limit for a-family of 4: $1421 (Alternative B- 100 percent of the 
FPL). 
Section 1931 (b) MFBU 
Mom $ 710 net nonexempt 
Dad $ 200 net nonexempt ,' 
Child #I $ $ 210 net nonexempt s 
Child #2$ $ 450 net nonexempt 
Total $1,570 net nonexempt 
Limit $1,421 net nonexempt (April 2000) 
As applicants, the family is ineligible because their net nonexempt income of $1,520 exceeds the Aprill, 2001 
Section 1931 income limit for the family. Sneede rules would then apply. Mom's and Dad's income are below 
the $739 parental needs allocation; therefore, they do not allocate. 
Section 1931 (b) Sneede 
a 
MBU #1 MBU #2 MBU #3 
Mother $710 ' Child #1 $210 Child #2 G~o 
Father $200 .- Total $210 Total $450 
Total $910 Limit $41 8 Limit $41 8 
Limit $995 
Mother, Father, and Child #1 are eligible for Section 1931(b). Evaluate Child #2 for the MN program. 
MN Proqram 
MFBU 
Child #2$ $450 
Limit $600 
'NOTE: Effective November 1, 2002, applicants will receive a $240 deduction from certain disability income. I 
Pending 
SECTION NO.: 50226 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 270 DATE: 1 1 /05/02 8G-20

[page 155]
MEDI-CAL ELlGlBlLlTY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
Child #2 is eligible without a SOC. In month #2, use Alternative A and the $240 +I12 deductions for 
recipients to determine if Child #2 is eligible for Section 1931 (b). See the worksheet example (a) in the 
Charts and Forms section. 
,y . . 
>I 
Example 22: (Unmarried Parent Working 100 Hours or More) 
a, 
Unmarried Mom, Dad, their mutual eight-month-old child, and Mom's separate child (age four) apply for 
Medi-Cal. Dad is incapacitated. Mom works part time and has $690 earned income and $700 unearned 
income. Dad has $500 unearned income. The children have no income. 
Section 1931 (b) MFBU 
Mom's net nonexempt income $1 300 (690-$90+$700) 
Dad's net nonexempt income 500 
0 Mutual child 
Mom's child 0 
Total income $1,800 
Limit for 4 $1,421 
4 
Since the family is above the April 1, 2000 Section 1931 (b) income limit and the couple is not married, Sneede 
rules apply. We will assume they die property eligible. 
Mom's income $1,300 Mom's Separate Child $ 0 Dad's income $500 
Parental needs - 696 Allocation from Mom 302 Parental Needs -696 
Total $ 604 Total $302 Allocation 0 
Allocation t 2 = $ 302 
Mutual Child's income $ 0 
Allocation from Mom $302 
Allocation from Dad $3 
Total $302 
MBU #1 
Mom $696 
MBU #2 
Mutual Child 
Mom's Child 302 Total 
Total $998 Limit 
Limit $938 
MBU #3 
$302 Dad $500 
Total 
Limit 
9 
Mom and her separate child fail to pass Section 1931(b). The.fshould be evaluated for the MN program. The 
mutual child and Dad pass Section 1931 (b). 
-& 
MN Proqram 
- - 
Mom $1,300- $302 (Allocation used for Section 1931 (b) Mutual Child) 
Separate Child 0 
Total 998 
Limit for 2 750 
SOC $248 
Mom and her separate child have a SOC of $248 in month one. Note: An unmarried parent may not deduct 
any income if their income was used to make the other parent eligible for Section 1931 (b). Evaluate the 
separate child for the 133 Percent program. Only the income of Mom and the separate child is used. 
Pending 
SECTION NO.: 50226 MANUAL LETTER NO.:270 DATE: 1 1 /05/02 8G-21

[page 156]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDUFES MANUAL 
133 Percent Proqram 
Mom $1,300 
Dad NIA 
Separate child 0 
Mutual child NIA 
Total $1,300 
Limit for 4 $1,890 
Mom's separate child is eligible for the 133 percent program as of April 1, 2001 in month one. In month 
two, the family was evaluated as recipients (Alternative A). 
Section 1931 (b) Determination 
Mom's net nonexempt income $925 (690-$240+ '/2 +$700) 
Dad's net nonexempt income 500 
Mutual child 0 
Mom's child 0 
Total income $1425 .< 
Limit for 4 $ 942 
Sneede rules apply. 
Mom's income $925 
Parental needs - 389 
Total $536 
Allocation t 2 = $ 268 
MBU #I 
Mom $389 
Mom's Child $268 
Total $657 
Limit $639 
- 
Mom's Separate Child $ 0 Dad's income $500 
Allocation from Mom $268 Parental Needs - 389 
Total $268 Allocation + 1 $1 1 1 
MBU #2 MBU #3 
Mutual Child $379 Dad 
Total $379 Total 
Limit $265 Limit 
Mutual Child $0 
Allocation from Mom $268 
Allocation from Dad $111 
Total :. $379 
i 
$389 
$389r 
$390 
Dad is the only person who passes under Alternative A in month two. The family is evaluated under Altemative 
B (100% of FPL). Assume that there has not been any change in income; therefore, Dad and the mutual child 
pass Section 1931 (b), Mom's separate child is eligible under the 133 Percent program and Mom has a SOC 
of $248. Five months later Mom takes a full time job with a net nonex pt eamed income of $1,500 and she 
is working over 100 hours. Dad is no longer incapacitated and has $ 3 net nonexempt earned income. Mom 
is determined to be the PWE. Because there has been a change of circumstanqs and no principal wage 
earner has been established earlier, the U-Parent test applies. NOTE: If Mom had been unemployed at the time 
of application and unemployment was established as the basis for the child's deprivation rather than Dad's 
incapacity, Mom couldhave worked 100 hours or more without this U-Parent test. 
U-Parent Test 
Mom $1,500 net nonexempt earned income 
Dad 500 net nonexempt earned income 
Total $2,000 
Limitfor4 $1.421 
Although Mom and Dad failed the U-Parent test, Mom still has deprivation because her separate child has an 
absent parent; however, Dad and the mutual child have no deprivation. Dad may not be an essential person 
Pending 
SECTION NO.: 50226 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 270 DATE: 11/05/02 86-22 ..

[page 157]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
because he is not married. Mom and her separate child are reevaluated for Section 1931 (b) as recipients for 
income purposes. Dad and the mutual child are ineligible members of the MFBU. Assume Mom and her 
separate child are eligible for Section 1931 (b). Dad has no linkage. He and the mutual child are eligible for TMC 
because they were terminated from Section 1931 (b) due to increased hours of employment (loss of deprivation). 
If Mom and her child become ineligible for Section 1931(b) for increq$ee,earnings, tky will be eligible for TMC. 
Note: To be eligible for Section 1931(b), a parent must have at legst one deprived child in a zero SOC program. 
If the parent(s) do not wish the child to receive Medi-Cal and they meet all program requirements, the county 
may "suppressn the card and the child is still considered eligible. In Sneede situations where the MFBU fails to 
pass Section 1931 (b) and the recipient parent's or parent's MBU passes using only one Alternative, but not the 
other Alternative, the allocated amount to the children which was used to establish the parent(s) eligibility may 
not be changed. Alternative A and B may be used for the other MBU's using the allocation which made the - 
parents eligible. If the parent(s) pass or fail using either Alternative, the most advantageous allocation may be 
used to determine eligibility for the children. 
Example 23: (Minor Parent with a CalWORKs Child Living with Senior Parent) 
Minor parent and minor parent's child living with senior parent. The senior parent does not have care and 
control of both the minor and the minor parent's child; therefore, she is ineligible for Section 1931 (b). The 
minor's child is receiving CaIWORKs; however, the minor pa~nt is ineligible for CalWORKs due to the 
senior parent's income. NOTE: This is one of the exceptions to the automatic Section 1931(b) described in 
Section I3 above. . . 
Section 1931 (b) MFBU The minor parent is eligible for Section 1931 (b). If the minor had 
income which was used in determining the CalWORKs grant, he 
<Senior parent> $900 or she would receive a deduction equal to the amount by which 
Minor parent the infant's cash grant was decreased from the grant amount the 
Limit $900 infant would have received if the minor parent had no income. 
Limit $968 (April 2001) The senior parent should be evaluated forflhe MN program. 
% 
If the minor parent had income which resulted in Section 1931 (b) ineligibility, Sneede rules would apply. If the 
minor were still ineligible, shelhe and the senior parent should be evaluated for the MNcor Percent programs. 
The senior parent may be an eligible member in the MN program. 
Example 24: (Unmarried Parents with an SSI Child ) 
Unmarried parents living with their mutual child who is receiving SSI. The are applying for Medi-Cat 
based on the father's incapacity. 
Section 1931 (b) MFBU 
Father - - $400 
Mother $600 
Total - $1 000 
Limit $ 968 (April 2001) 
Sneede rules apply. The unmarried parents do not allocate any income to each other or to their SSI child. 
Section 1931 (b) MBU #1 Section 1931 (b) MBU #2 
Father $400 
Limit $714 
The mother and father are both eligible for Section 1931 (b). 
Mother $600 
Limit $714 
Pending 
SECTION NO.: 50226 + MANUAL LETTER NO.: 270 DATE: 1 1 /05/02 8G-23

[page 158]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
Example 25: (Married 19 Year Old Parents Living With Senior Parents and Sibling) 
Married 19-year-old parents have care and control of their two kar old child and live with the 19 year old 
mother's senior parents and the 19 year old mother's younger 10 year old .sister. All qe requesting Medi-Cal 
as applicants. There is unemployed parent deprivation for the two yea%fdf child and incapacity deprivation for 
the younger sister. The 19-year-old parents are considered adults in the Section 1931 (b) determination. The 
senior parents are not in the Section 1931 (b) MFBU with the 19-ye'ar-old parents. 
Section 1931 (b) MFBU 
19 Year Old Mother $500 net nonexempt unearned income 
19 Year Old Father $1 090-$90=$1000 net nonexempt earned income 
2 Year Old Parent's Child $0 
Total $1 500 
Limit $1 220 (April 2001) 
The above family is not eligible for Section 1931 (b) based on the April 1, 2001 limits. Evaluate the other family 
members separately to see if they are eligible for Section 1931 (b). 
Section 1931 (b) MFBU 
Senior Mother $650 net nonexempt income 
Senior Father $600 Net nonexempt income 
10 Year Old Child $.-A2 
Total $1 250 
Limit $1220 (April 2001) 
Since all family members failed to pass Section 1931(b). they may be evaluated for the YN program following 
the married minor mother MN MFBU rules since the 19 year old mother is still consided a child under that 
program. NOTE: If either the 19 year old family or the senior parent family passed Section 1931 (b}, they would 
not be in the MFBU of those who did not pass Section 1931(b) and were then evaluated for the MN or MI 
program. This is similar to the MFBU composition when some family members are eligible .for CalWORKs. 
MN MFBU #1 
<Senior Dad> 
<Senior Mom> 
19 Year-Old Mother 
~19Year Old Father> 
c2 Year Old Child> 
c10 Year-Old Sibling> 
Total 
Limit . - 
$650 net income 
$600 
$ 500 net income 
$1 000 net income 
$0 
u 
$2750 
$1417 (April 2001 
There is no inappropriate deeming when determining eligibility for the 19 year old mother. The 19-Year Old 
Mother has a monthly share of cost of $1333. For more information about the MN Sneede determination for 
married minor children living with a senior parent, see the Procedures Article 8F, Example 18. 
MN MFBU #2 
49-Year-Old Mother> $500 net income 
19 Year-Old Father $1000 net income 
2 Year-Old Child $0 
Total $1 500 
Limit $ 934 
Pending 
SECTION NO.: 50226 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 270 DATE:11/05/02 86-24

[page 159]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEPURES MANUAL 
Evaluate the 2 year-old child for the 133 Percent Program. The child is eligible. The father has a share of cost 
of $566. 
MN MFBU #3 .y . ' > 8 k 
41 9 Year-Old Mother> $ 500 
Senior Father $650 
Senior Mother $600 
10 Year Old Child $0 
Total $1750 
Limit $1100 
Since the 19 year old has income, Sneede rules apply. 
Sneede MN MBU #I Sneede MN MBU #2 
Senior Father $650-$600 =$50f 3 = $16.66 net income 49 Year-old Mother> $500+$16.66 income 
Senior Mother $600+ $16.66 net lncome 
10 Year Old $ 0 + $16.66 net Income 
Total $1233.32 net income 9E 
Limit $934 ., 
SOC $299 - 
The senior father, mother, and 10-year-old child areeligible with a share of cost. Evaluate the 10 year old for 
the 100 Percent Program. 
100% Program 
Senior Father $ 650 
Senior Mother $ 600 
19-Year-Old NIA 
10-Year-Old $ 0 
Total 
Limit 
$1,250 
$1,471 (April 2001) 
The 1 0-year-old child is eligible. 
Example 26: (Unmarried Pregnant Woman, Her Separate Child, and Father of Unborn) 
P An unmarried pregnant woman in her second trimester, her four year old separate child, and the unemployed 
father of the'unborn request Medi-Cal. The father may not be aided in the Section 1931(b) MFBU until his child 
is born. 
Section 1931 (b)IMFBU 
pregnant Mother $1000 net earned income 
Unborn $0 
Mother's Separate Child $ 500 net unearned income 
<Father of Unborn> $ 600 net unearned income 
Total $2100 
Limit $1471 
The family is over the Section 1931(b) limit based on April 1, 2001 FPL limits. Sneede rules apply 
Pending 
SECTION NO.: 50226 - MANUAL LETTER NO.: 270 DATE:11/05/02 8G-25

[page 160]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
Pregnant Mother $1000 - $968= $32 + 1 
Father of Unborn $600 
Mother's Separate Child $500 + $32 from Mother 
k 
Section 1931(b) Sneede MBU #1 Section 1931 (b) Sneede MBU #g glction 1931 (b) Sneede MBU #3 
Pregnant Mother $968 Mother's Separate Child $532 <Father of Unborn> $600 
Unborn Total $532 Total $600 
Total $968 Limit $484 Limit $716 
Limit $968 
The pregnant mother and her unborn are eligible for Section 1931 (b). The mother's separate child and the 
father of the unborn should be evaluated for the MN program . 
MN MFBU 
Mother's Separate Child $500 
Father of the Unborn $600 
Total $1 100 
Limit $750 
. , 
Sneede rules apply. 
MN Sneede MBU #1 MN ~neede MBU #2 
Mother's Separate Child $500 Father of the Unborn $600 
Limit $375 Limit $600 
4' s 
Mother's separate child failed to pass. She should be evaluated for the 133 Percent prog@m. The father of ' 
the unbom passed the MN program. 
133 Percent Proaram 
Pregnant Mother $1 000 net earned income 
Unborn $0 -. 
Mother's Separate Child $ 500 net unearned income 
<Father of Unborn> $ N/A 
Total $1,500 
Limit $1,957 (April 2001 ) .d" 
Mother's separate child is eligible for the 133 Percent program; therefore, the mother is also eligible for 
Section 1931 (b). In month two, redetermine the family as Section 1931(b) recipients. The separate child 
may now be eligible for-the Section 1931(b) program since her mother has earned income. The father of 
the unborn should be evaluated for the Section 1931 (b) program if he is still unemployed after the birth of 
the unbom or he may opt out until the infant is age one if he no longer requests aid. 
Example 27: (Grandchildren on CalWORKs, 18 Year Old Parents without Satisfactory Immigration 
Status (SIS), Senior Parent without SIS) 
Citizen grandchildren on CalWORKs. The 18 year old parents are not enrolled in school (adults) and do not 
have satisfactory immigration status nor does the 40 year old senior parent. The all live together and all are 
requesting aid. Since the grandchildren are financial eligible for CalWORKs, assume that the 18 year old 
parents are eligible for Section 1931 (b) without a determination because they are ineligible for CalWORKs only 
because of immigration status. See Example 1. 
Pending 
SFCTlnN NO . 50226 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 77n DATE:l I /n< /n~ 8G-26 
- . -

[page 161]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
I 
CalWORKs Section 1931 (b) MFBU 
Grandchildren 18 year old parents 
MNMFBU 
Senior- parent $TQOO net nonexempt income 
i$m'itl $ 600 
The senior parent is not eligible for Section 1931 (b) because ;he has no deprived "child" who is eligible for 
Section 1931 (b) or another zero SOC program. The senior parent is eligible for the MN program until 18 year 
old deprived child reaches age 21. The parents and the senior parents are only eligible for restricted Medi-Cal 
benefits. 
Example 28: (Senior Mother, Unmarried Minor Daughter, Unmarried Father of Minor Daughter's Child, 
Unmarried Minor Parent's Mutual Deprived Child, Married Pregnant Adult Daughter and Spouse.) 
Senior Mom with younger children, a 17 year old daughter with a boyfriend and their child, and a married 18 
year old pregnant daughter in her first trimester with her husband. All want aid. Assume that the 17 year 
old father of the child and the 18 year old father of the unborn are unemployed. Assume that the 18 year 
old mother is not enrolled in school and expected to graduate by age 19 and is therefore considered an 
adult; however, she is not eligible for Section 1931(b) because she has no other deprived children and is not 
in her last trimester of pregnancy. NOTE: Adult children who have deprived children (including a pregnant 
woman in her last trimester) are not included in the Section 1931 (b) MFBU with the senior parent and may 
apply on their own. See Example 25. 
Section 1931 (b) MFBU #I Section 1931 (b) MFBU #2 
Senior grandmother <Unmarried 17 year old minor mother> 
Other children under 18 17 year minor mother's child 
Unmarried 17 year old minor mother Unmarried father of child 
I + , 
<Pregnant married 18 year old> 5 
, . 
Assume that MFBU #1 and MFBU #2 pass the Section 1931 (b) test. NOTE: Persons that pass Section 
1931 (b) are not included in the MNJMI MFBU; therefore, the senior grandmother, unmacried 17 year old 
minor mother and siblings are not included in the MN MFBU. 
MN MFBU #3 
Married pregnant 1 8-year-old 
Unborn 
<Husband> 
If the senior grandmother, unmarried 17 year old minor mother, and youngekchildren (MFBU#l above) 
failed to pass Section 1931(b), but MFBU #2 is still eligible for Section 1931(b), the following example 
would apply: Fdlow example 18 in the Sneede Procedure 8F on page 54. NOTE: The 18 year old married 
mother is considered a child in the MN program. All parents, spouses, and siblings including the unborn are 
together in MFBU #l. Modified Sneede rules apply to MFBU #1 
MN MFBU #1 MN MFBU #2 MN MFBU #3 
<Senior grandmother> Spouse of the 18 year old <Married 18 year old> 
<Younger siblings> <Married 18 year old> unborn 
Married 18 year old unborn Unmarried 17 year old 
Unborn Senior grandmother 
<Spouse of the 18 year> Younger siblings 
Pending 
SECTION NO.: 50226 * MANUAL LETTER NO.: 270 DATE: 11/05/ 02 8G-27

[page 162]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
<Unmarried 17 year old> 
On the other hand, if no family members are eligible for Section 1'931(b), all except the child of the 17 year 
old and the parent of that child would be included in the MN MFBU #I (See Exarnpl%l8 in the Sneede 
Procedures 8F page 54). ,d p, ,- 
MN MFBU #1 MN MFBU #2 MN MFBU #4 
<Senior grandmother> Spouse of 18 year old <Married 18 year old> < 17 year old>- 
<Younger siblings> <Married 18 year old> Unborn Child of 17 year old 
Married 18 year old Unborn Senior grandmother Other parent of child 
Unborn Younger siblings 
<Spouse of 18 year old> 17 year old 
<unmarried1 7 year old> 
Note: Modified Sneede rules apply to MFBU #I. See Procedures Article 8F. Also, when the 18 year old 
reaches her last trimester, she and her unborn may be aided as adults in the Section 1931(b) program if 
eligible. Her husband is ineligible until the child is born and he must be aided alone in the MN program. 
See Example 10. 
4 
Section 1931 (b) MFBU #3 
Married 18 year old 
Unborn 
<Husband> 
When the unmarried 17 year old reaches age 18 and is not enrolled in school, she will be an adult and may 
be aided without any deeming from the senior Mom. 
,I 
Section 1931 (b) MFBU #1 Section 1931 (b) MFBU #2 i 
Senior grandmother 
Younger children 
18 year old unmarried mom 
Child of 18 year old 
Unmarried father of child 
If any of the persons under 21 lack deprivation or linkage, they are not eligible for Section 1931(b) or the MN 
program and must be aided in the Medically Indigent program or the appropriate Percent programs. 
Pending 
SECTION NO.: 50226 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 270 DATE: 11/05/02 86-28

[page 163]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCCDURES MANUAL 
E. CHARTS AND FORMS 
a) Section 193l(b) Sneede Prorated lncome Standard and Property Levels -April 1,2000 
b) Section 1931 (b) Sneede Prorated lncome Standard and Property Levels - M rch 1,2000 
C) Section 1931 (b) Sneede Prorated Income Standard and Pro~rtyLevels - J& 1. 1999 
d) Section 1931 (b) Sneede Prorated lncome Standard and Property Levels -July 1, 1998 
e) Section 1931 (b) Sneede Prorated lncome Standard and Property Levels - January 1, 1998 to June 30, 1998 
f) Section 1931 Applicant & Recipient Budget Form Net Non-Exempt lncome [MC 176M-1931 GroupAPPURECIP] 
g) Section 1931 Recipient Budget Form Net Non-Exempt lncome [MC 176MA -1931 Group - REClP 
h) Section 1931 Program Worksheet: Applying the $240 &1/2 Deduction to Recipient Families with Three or More 
Persons with Earnings [MC 176M-A -1 931 Group - 3+ Earner] 
i) Section 1931 (b) Sneede Net Nonexempt lncome Determination - Applicant or Recipient [MC175-31.2A 1931 
Group] 
j) Section 1931 (b) Sneede Net Nonexempt lncome Determination - Recipient MBASC [MC 17531.2R 1931 Group] 
k) Property Reserve Work Sheet MC 176P 
I) Section 1931 (b) Sneede Property Work Sheet [MC 324 1931 Group] 
m) Vehicle Determination Work Sheet for 1931 Group [MC 176 P-V 1931 Group] 
n) Section 1931 (b) Recipient lncome Limits Effective July 1, 1999 
o) Section 1931 (b) Sneede Prorated lncome Standard and Property Levels - April 2002 
p) Example 21 Applicant-and Recipient Budget Sheet and Seede Mini Budget Determination 
. . 
F. EXAMPLES 
1. Some Family Members Receive CalWORKs 
2. Family Members Who are Not Eligible for Section 1931 (b) Due to Age 
3. Applicant Family - Sneede and Poverty Level Programs Apply 
4. Stepparent with Separate and Non-Deprived Mutual Children 
5. Only the Separate Children of a Parent in a Stepparent Household Apply 
6. Sneede Case - Child with lncome is Only Eligible for Percent Programs 
7. Married Couple, Mutual & Separate Children and 20 Year Old Separate Child 
8. Employed Unmarried parents with Mutual and Separate Children 
9. Married Recipients Terminated from CalWORKs 
10. Married Pregnant Woman with No Other Children 
11. Recipient Stepparent Household with Separate and Mutual Children 
12. Applicant Minor Parent, Siblings, Senior Parents 
13. Minor "Adult" Child, Infant, and Boyfriend Living with Senior Parents 
14. Senior Parent with Applying'for a Pregnant Minor and Unborn 
15. Senior Parent with Care and Control of a Deprived Minor and Infant 
16. Recipient Senior Parent with Care and Control, Adult Paryt & Adult's Child 
17. Recipient Senior Parent with Care and Control, Adult Parent & Adult's Child 
18. 20 Yea'r Old Parent Living with her Child and Senior Parents 
-r 
19. Essential Person 
20. Spouse in Long Term Care - 21. Married Applicants and Children with Earned and Unearned lncome 
22. Unmarried Parent Working 100 Hours or More 
23. Minor Parent with CalWORKs Child Living with a Senior Parent 
24. Unmarried Parents with a SSI Child 
25. Married 19 Year Old Parents Living with Senior Parents and Sibling 
26. Unmarried Pregnant Woman, Her Separate Child, Father of Unborn 
27. Grandchildren on CalWORKs, 18 Year Old Parents & Senior Parent Without SIS. 
28. Senior Mother, Unmarried Minor Daughter, Unmarried Father of Minor Daughter's 
Child, Unmarried Parent's Mutual Deprived Child, Married Pregnant Adult Daughter 
and her Spouse 
Page 6 
Page 6 
Page 7 
Page 8 
Page 8 
Page 9 
Page 9 
Page 10 
Page 11 
Page 13 
Page 13 
Page 14 
Page 14 
Page 15 
Page 16 
Page 16 
Page 17 
Page 17 
Page 18 
Page 19 
Page 20 
Page 21 
Page 23 
Page 23 
Page 24 
Page 25 
Page 26 
Page 27 
Pending 
SECTION NO.: 50226 * MANUAL LETTER NO.:270 DATE9 1 /05/02 86-29

[page 165]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
Section 1931(b) Determinations: Sneede v. Kizer 
Prorated FPL Income Standard and Property Levels 
Person Type 193l(b) Income 
Single Parent $696 
Single Parent with Unborn 938 
Married Couple -Two Adults 938 
Married Couple with Unborn 1,180 
Unmarried Couple - Each Unmarried Partner 696 
Property 
I 
Allow the full non-Sneede Section 193 1 (b) income/property limits for the MBU based on the number of 
individuals in the MBU. 
Each MBU receives full non-Sneede 193 1(b) incomelproperty limit based on the number of persons in each 
MBU. If there is a pregnant minor in the MFBU, include the unborn in the pregnant minor's MBU. 
*NOTE: Add $242 for each additional child after 10 to Section 1931(b) incomestandards to determine prorated income 
standards. No. Children in MBU X 1931(b) Income Standard for = Prorated income 
Parent(s) + No. Children in I\IBU Parent(s) + Child(ren) in MBU 
I No. of Children 
in MBU 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
Pending 
SECTION NO.: 50226 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 234 DATE: 12/1/00 8G-30 
One Parent Two Parents 
Prorated Income 
$ 469 
787 
1,066 
1,331 
1,588 
Prorated Income 
$ 393 
71 1 
998 
1,270 
1,533 
1,79 1 
Prorated Property 
$1 SO0 
2,100 
2,475 
2,760 
3,000 
3,215 
3,413 
3,600 
3,780 
3,819 
6 
7 
8 
9 
1 0* 
Prorated Property 
$1,050 
1,650 
2,070 
2,400 
2,679 
2,925 1,840 
2,090 
2,338 
2,584 
2,830 
2,046 
2,297 
2,547 
2,796 
3,150 
3,360 
3,437 
3,500

[page 166]
MEDI-CAL ELlGlBlLlN PROCEDURES MANUAL - 
Section 1931(b) Determinations: Sneede v. Kizer 
Prorated FPL Income Standard and Property Levels 
1 - March 1,2000 - I 
Person Type 1931(b) Income 
Single Parent $687 
Single Parent with Unborn 922 
Married Couple -Two Adults 922 
Married CoupIe with Unborn 1,157 
Unmarried Couple - Each Unmarried Partner 687 
I 
Allow the full non-Sneede Section 193 1 (b) incomelproperty limits for the MBU based on the number of 
individuals in the MBU. I 
I 
Each MBU receives full non-Sneede 1931(b) incomelproperty limit based on the number of persons in each 
MBU. If there is a pregnant minor in the MFBU, include the unborn in the pregnant minor's MBU. I 
*NOTE: Add $235 for each additional child after 10 to Section 1931(b) income standards to determine prorated income 
standards. No. Children in MBU X 1931(b) JncomeStandard for = Prorated income 
Parent(s) + No. Children in MBU Parent(s) + Child(ren) in MBU 
No. of Children 
in MBU 
I 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
1 0* 
Pending 
SECTION NO.: 50226 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 234 DATE: 12/1/00 8G-31 
One Parent Two Parents 
Prorated Income 
$ 461 
772 
1,044 
1,302 
1,552 
1,798 
2,04 1 
2,282 
2,522 
2,761 
Prorated Income 
$ 386 
696 
' 977 
1,242 
1,498 
1,749 
1,997 
2,242 
2,485 
2,727 
Prorated Property 
$1,500 
2,100 
2,475 
2,760 
3,000 
3,2 15 
3,413 
3,600 
3,780 
3,819 
Prorated Property 
$1,050 
1,650 
2,070 
2,4 00 
2,679 
2,925 
3,150 
3,360 
3,437 
3,500

[page 167]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
Section 1931(b) Determinations: Sneede v. Kizer 
Prorated Income Standard and Property Levels 
- July 1, 1999 - 
I. MBU contains ah,~duit - ~ay-.-ifs~r 1rkiude an Unborn 7 .. - . . s - 
I i i 
-- 
Single Parent 
Single Parent with Unborn 
Married Couple -Two .Adults 
Married Couple with Unborn 
Unmarried Couple - Each Unmarried Partner 
Person Type 
I I 
11. MBU ~oitains ~b;lt(s) andkhild(re6) 
I - I 193l(b) Income 
'NOTE: Add %I4 for each additional child after 10 to Section 1931(b) income standards to determine prorated income 
standards. No. Children in MBU X 1931(b) Income Standard for = Prorated itwome 
Parent(s) + No. Children in RlBU Parent(s) + ChiId(ren) in MBU 
Property 
Allow the full non-Sneede Section 193 I (b) incornelproperty limits for the MBU based on the number of 
individuals in the MBU. 
. ). , - .nT. MBU Contains avonparent Caretaker:~elative, or Child(ren) with No Parents Living in the : 
fiorne, oy ~hildfren~.~hos~~arent~i~ PAfOther PA and Not in the MFBU 
Each MBU receives full non-Sneede 193 l(b) incornelproperty limit based on the number of persons in each 
MBU. If there is a pregnant minor in the MFBU. include the unborn in the pregnant minor's MBU 
,,,, '24 -- * . - .- . 
iii. '~~"~~tainios'0~13$@1d~4n 4 .+: *@ ~ive with.0ne or B'oth parents (No! ~te$~~iekts) arid 2 
Thej^Ay in theSarrie MFBU (I& S6t-i:ad"de a parent ivhb is PA/o~~~~;PA and nit in the 5 
A.IFBU;A;~O, if$&-< i? a prpwGt,minor ...?>,* . in - the . MFBU, her unborn is considered as another: . '.' .5&ild 'in thk prkgna& rninoi'i-MBU:) .; " 
- ". 
Pending 
SECTION NO.: 50226 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 234 DATE: 12/1/00 86-32 
No. of Children 
in MBU 
I 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
>. 
Two Parents 
Prorated Income 
$ 265 
47 1 
64 5 
806 
948 
1,084 
1,219 
1,361 
1,404 
I ,44 I 
.. . * 
One Parent 
Prorated Property 
$1,050 
1,650 
2,070 
2,400 
2,679 
2,925 
3,150 
3,360 
3,437 
3,500 
Prorated Income 
$ 320 
529 
707 
860 
1,007 
1,138 
1,265 
1,393 
Prorated Property 
$1,500 
2,100 
2.475 
2.760 
3,000 
3,2 15 
3,413 
3,600 
3,780 
3.819 
9 
1 0* 
1,53 1 
1,560

[page 169]
MEQI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
Section 1931(b) Determinations: Sneede v. Kizer 
Prorated Income Standard and Property Levels 
NOTE: Add $14 for each additional person over 10 to determine 
higher lnrom~ Standards 
Pending 
SECTION NO.: 50226 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 214 DATE: 12/1/00 86-33

[page 170]
MEDI-CAL ELlGlBlLlN PROCEDURES MANUAL 
Section 1931(b) Determinations: Sneede v. Kizer 
Prorated Income Standard and Property Levels 
-January 1,1998 through June 30,1998 - 
NOTE: Add $14 for each additional person over 10 to determine 
higher Income Standards. 
Pending 
SECTION NO.: 50226 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 234 DATE: 22/1/00 86-34

[page 171]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
sated Caltomct - Heanh And Human Server 4- Depamern of Heanh Serrces 
SEC. 1931 APPLICANT AND RECIPIENT BUDGET FORM: FOR 
DETERMINING NET NON-EXEMPT INCOME AND SECTION 1931 INCOME 
ELlGlBlLlTY FOR APPLICANTS; AND FOR RECIPIENTS UNDER ALTERNATIVE B 
1 CASE NAME' 
I 
0 NEW APP IJ REDETERMINATION IJ CHANGE 0 RETRO ELlG 0 CORRECTtON 
COUNTY DISTRICT 
I 
EFFECTM ELlG DATE FOR THIS BUDGET 
MONTH YEAR 
I 
COUNiY USE 
1 
NAME MFBU MEMBER dZ 
WE MFBU MEMBER R1 
NAME MFBV MEMBER #'P 
I 
NAME MFBU MEMBER #3: 
I I 
UNEARNED INCOME MFBU MEMBER 9 - : UNEARNED INCOME MFBU MEMBER X- I 
NAME MFBU MEMBER S OTHER COVEPAGE 
I 
NME MFBU MEMBER 08. 
I WE MFBU MEMBERM: 
UNEARNED- 
ENTER UNEARNED INCOME OF EACH MFBU + 
1 I "ZR THEN TOTAL FOR MFBU (INCLUDE UNEARNED MCOME MFBU MEMBER U - NON-EXEMPT DISABILITI-BASED INCOME 
. - 
NAME MFBU MEMBER u? 
I 
1 
TOTAL REMAINING INCOME: NON-EXEMPT 
EQUAL TO LIMIT FROM LINE 13. FAh4ILY IS PROGRAMS. IF SNEEDE - ELIGIBLE CLASS MEUBER. EVALUATE FOR SEC 1931 UNDER 
INCOME ELIGIBLE SNEEDE 
ELlGlBlLlTY WORKERS SIGNAILIRE WORKER NUMBER COMPUlAlION DATE COUNTY USE 
I 
1 
NAME MFBU MEMBER 15 
MC li6 MA-1931 Gco-APPVREClP (21 W) 
Pending 
SECTION NO.: 50226 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 234 DATE: 12/1/00 8G-35 
NAME MFBU MEMBER UlO

[page 173]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
SEC. 1931 RECIPIENT BUDGET FORM: FOR DETERMINING NET NON-EXEMPT INCOME 
AND SECTION 1931 INCOME ELIGIBILITY FOR RECIPIENTS UNDER ALTERNATIVE A 
ENTER UNEARNED INCOME OF EACH MFBU 
EARNINGS OF MFBU MEMBER O- 
Pending 
SECTION NO.: 50226 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 234 DATE: 12/1/00 86-36

[page 175]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
sete ar tauomrd-xealm And Hlrman S-r ~geml 
SEC. 1931 PROGRAM WORKSHEET: APPLYING THE $240 8 % DEDUCTION TO RECIPIENT FAMILIES WlTH 3 
OR MORE PERSONS WlTH EARNINGS 
Pending 
SECTION NO.: 50226 MANUAL LETTER NO.: DATE: 121 86-37 234 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
iO 
11 
12 
$- 
NAME: 
Family's Non-exempt earned 
income 
Non-exempt earned income of 
two highest earners 
Unused $240 deduction (from box 7a 
Recipient Budget Sheet IMC176M 1931 
RECIP); if result is 0 or less. enter 0) 
Remaining Non-exernpt earned 
income of two highest earners (if 
deduction exceeds earned income, enter 
-0.7 
Non-exempt earned income of 
3rd highest earner 
$120 deduction 
Hislher remaining Non-exempt 
earned income (if deduction exceeds 
earned income, enter '0.7 
Non-exempt earned income of 4th 
highest earner 
$120 deduction 
Hislher remaining Nonexempt 
earned income (if deduction exceeds 
eamed Income, enter '0.7 
Other remainder Non-exempt 
earned income (~f 5 or more persons 
with earnings, enter Total of their remainder 
earned income after subtracting $120 from 
earnings of each.) (If deduction exceeds 
earned income. enter -0.7 
Non-exempt earned income 
Subtotal (total of all remainder eamed 
income: add lines 4. 7, 10 & 11 thn 
worksheet); enter amount on Section 
1931 Program Budget Sheet (line to) 
$- 
-$- 
= $ - 
$ 
- $120 
= $ - 
$ 
-9120 
= S - 
= $ 
= $ - 
a- $- s-

[page 177]
MEDI-GAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
State of California-Health and Human Services Agency Department of Health Sewices 
SECTION 1931(b) SNEEDE V. KIZER NET NONEXEMPT INCOME DETERMINATION 
AND MINI BUDGES UNIT (MBU) DETERMINATION - APPLiCANT 
-----.-.-- 
County District - -----T~~~y~ 
Effective Date 
Month Year 
-LAP------- - - -.-. 
I i L Case Type: APPLICANT OR RECIPIENT USING FEDERAL POVERTY LEVEL (FPL) INCOME STANDARD 1 
PART 1 
NOTE: The only deduction applicable to the Sectlon 1931(b) program IS the deduction for educational expenses, as provided 
in Section 50547. Ttle 22, California Code of Regulations. 7 
ENTER NAME OF EACH MFBU MEMBER Name Name Name Name 
(Do not list unborns) 
I 
Person Type O Parent A or 0 Parent B or I 0 Child 1 3 Child 0 Ch!ld 
C Caretaker 0 Caretaker I I 
Relative Relative 
1 1 Source and amount of nonexempt unearned Income 
I I I I i I 
L Net childlspousal support received @ 1 I 
I 
I I I I I -? 
(add lines 1. 2. 3. and 4). i 22 
' Sources include: net income from property. Social Secur~ty nondlsablltty payments, etc. 
Q ChildlSpousal Support Child support is income to the ch~ld, not to the parent or caretaker re!ative 
Payments Received 1 
Divide the 550 per month ch~ldispousal support deduction by the number of persons for whom the income is intended 1 
Any unused remainder w!ll be prorated among the rernainlng persons who stiil have support payments to app!y against 
the deduction. I 
1 3. In-kind income (IKI) @ 
4 Income ava~lable from PNother PA I I 
(see MC 1756, line A 4). 1 
5 Total nonexempt unearned income 
I 
! I 
Q Unearned IKI Prorate the unearned 1KI among the persons who receive the income Exampie MedkCal family budget unil (MFBU) I 
of four receives free housing Use IKI for four and each person receives one-fourth of the 1KI Add an unborn's share I 
of IKI to the pregnant woman's share. If the pregnant woman is Public Assistance (PA)/other PA, and not in the MFBU. I 
1 
I 
I 
1 I --I 
give the unborn's share to the father of the unborn II he is In the MFBU 1 
Child/Spousal support and/or IKI computations: i 
I i 
6. Source and amount of disability-based income. I 
I 
I I 
MC 175-31 2A (3100) 1931 Group Page 1 of 4 
Pending 
SECTION NO.: 50226 MANUAL LETTER NO.: DATE: l2/l/O0 ~(3-38 234

[page 178]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
members at home (from MC 176W. Part B. or 
22 Total deductions (add lines 19. 20 and 21). 
23. Tolal net countable income (subtract line 22 
from line 18). Enter this amount on MC 175-4 if 
no paren: in MFBU. If parent in MFBU, continue. 
9 Couri-ordered child Supporl or alimony. 
..., :O Income used lo determine PA elig~billty 
(see MC 175-6. Section 8). 
21. Other deductions: 
1 or income allocated from LTClBgC spouse I 1 
I 
. .. I 
naturalladopted children (divide Parent A's line 27 by 
line 28 and enter in applicable box). Do not enter 
! under Parent B rf unmarrled. 
Page L 0: 4 MC 175-31 2A (3100) 1931 Group 
Pending 
SECTION NO.: 50226 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 234 DATE: 12/1/00 86-39

[page 179]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
naturauadopted children (divide Parent B's line 27 by 
PART 2 
SECTION 1931(b) MBU DETERMINATION - PROPERTY AND INCOME 
0 Section 1931(b) FPL Income Test 0 Section 1931(b) Property Determination 
instructions: 
1. Include unborn in the mother's MBU and property liit/FPL income level unless mother is married. and onty her separate children 
want Medi-Cal. If the pregnant woman is PAlother PA. include the unborn in the spouse's or fathe<s MBU. 
2. Do not include an excluded child. 
3. Do not list MBU members in more than one MBU. 
4. If any MBU has excess property, check !o see if Medi-CaI linkage still exists for other family members. 
5. Property determinations. enter the allocation for each spouse from MC 324, line 29. 
6. Enter each personk net nonexempt income from lines 34 or 35. 
r 
MBU NUMBER 
Page 3 of 4 
Person nametnumber 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4 
5. 
6. 
TOTAL 
MBUs Property Limit 
0 FPL 
Check one: 
MBU NUMBER 
Pending 
SECTION NO.: 50226 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 234 DATE: 12/1/00 8G40 
Net Nonexempt 
0 Property O Income 
Person namelnumber 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
TOTAL 
MBUs 0 Property Limit 
0 FPL 
Check one: 
0 Excess property - FAIL 
0 Income ineligibility - exceeds FPL - Property eligible - FAlL 
0 lncorne eligible - at or below FPL - Property eligible - PASS 
Net Nonexempt 
Property 0 lncorne 
D Excess property - FAlL 
0 lncorne ineligibil~ty - exceeds FPL - Property eligible - FAlL 
0 Income eligible - at or below FPL - Propefly eligible - PASS

[page 180]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
MBU NUMBER 
'erson namelnumber I Net Nonexempt 
MBU NUMBER 
Person nametnumber 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
TOTAL 
MBUS 0 Properly Limit 
0 FPL 
1 
Property lncome 
I 
Net Nonexempt 
0 Property 0 lncorne 
TOTAL 
MBUs Property Limit 
0 FPL 
Check one: 
Check one: 
0 Excess property - FAlL 
lncome ineligibil~ty - exceeds FPL - Property eligible - FAlL 
0 lncorne eligible - at or below FPL - Property eligible - PASS 
0 Excess property - FAlL 
0 lncome ineligibility -exceeds FPL - Property eligible - FAlL 
0 lncome eligible - at or below FPL - Properly eligible - PASS I 
MBU NUMBER 
TOTAL I 
MBUs 0 Property Limit I 
Person namelnumber 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
TOTAL 
MBUs O Properly Limit 
0 FPL 
Check one: 
MBU NUMBER 
Excess property - FAIL 
0 Income ineligibility -exceeds FPL - Property eligible -FAIL 
Net Nonexempt 
0 Property O lncome 
Person namelnumber 
MC 175-31 2A (3100) 1931 Group Page 4 of 4 
0 Excess properly - FAlL 
lncome ineligib~lity - exceeds FPL - Property eligible - FAlL 
0 lncome eligible - at or below FPL - Property eligible - PASS 
Net Nonexempt 
Property 0 lncorne 
Pending 
SECTION NO.: 50226 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 234 DATE: 12/1/00 8G-41

[page 181]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
State of California-Health and Human Services Agency Department of Health Services 
SECTION 1931(b) SNEEDE V. KIZER NET NONEXEMPT INCOME DETERMINATION 
AND MINI BUDGET UNIT (MBU) DETERMINATION - RECIPIENT 
:;- County Use 1 
Effective Date 
Month Year 
Case Type: RECIPIENT USING MINIMUM BASIC STANDARD OF ADEQUATE CARE (MBSAC) 
PART 1 
1 1. Source and amount of nonexempt unearned income.' I I I I I 
NOTE: The only deduction applicable to the Section 1931(b) program is the deduction for educational expenses. as provided 
In Section 50547. Etle 22. California Code of Regulations. 
I 
Net childispousal support received. GI 
I I I 1 I 
' 3 In-k~nd income (IKI). Q 
4. Income available from PPJother PA 
(see MC 175-6, line A.4). 
5. Total nonexempt unearned Income 
(add lines 1. 2. 3. and 4) 
Sources include: net income from property, Social Security nondisabil~ty payments. elc. 
[ Q ChrldiSpousal Support Child support IS income to the child, not to the parent or caretaker relative. I 
Payments Recelved 
Divide the $50 per month childlspousal support deduction by the number of persons for whom the income is intended. 
Any unused remainder will be prorated among the remaining persons who still have support payments to apply against 
the deduction. 
Name 
D Parent B or 
0 Caretaker 
Relative 
ENTER NAME OF EACH MFBU MEMBER 
(Do not list unborns) 
Person Type 
Q Unearned IKI 
Name 
Child 
Name 
Child 
Name 
O Parent A or 
0 Caretaker 
Relative 
Prorate the unearned IKI among the persons who receive the income. Example: Medi-Cal family budget unit (MFBU) 
of four receives free housing. Use IKI for four and each person receives one-fourth of the IKI. Add an unborn's share 
of IKI to the pregnant woman's share. If the pregnant woman is Public Assistance (PA)lother PA, and not in the MFBU. 
Name 
0 Child 
give the unborn5 share to the father of the unborn if he IS in the MFBU. 
Chitd/Spousal supporf andlor IKI Computations: 
6. Source and amount of d~sab~lrty-based income 
(Continue to l~ne 7, even if no disabrllty Income ) 
MC 175-31 2R (3100) 1931 Group Page 1 of 4 
Pending 
SECTION NO.: 50226 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 234

[page 182]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
7. Section 1931(b) $240 deduction. 
8. Remaining nonexempt disability-based income 
(subtract line 7 from line 6). Enter 0 if negative. 
3. Unused Section 1931(b) deduction. (If line 6 is 0. 
enter $240. Otherwise. subtract line 6 from line 7.) 
Enter 0 if negative. 
28. PIS own needs (subtract $1 from MBSAC for 
one person). 
29. Total unearned in-kind income, income from PA. 
or income allocated from LTCIBBC spouse 
MC 175-31.2R (3100) 1931 Group Page 2 of 4 
Pending 
SECTION NO.: 50226 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 234 DATE: 12/1/00 86-43

[page 183]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
line 33 and enler in applicable box). Do not enter 
PART 2 
! SECTION 19311b) MBU DETERMINATION - PROPERTY AND INCOME I 
Section l93l(b) MBSAC Income Test 0 Section 1931(b) Property Determination 
I Instructions: 
I 
1. Include unborn in the mother's MBU and property IimlVMBSAC income level unless mother is married, and only her separate children 
want Medl-Cal. If the pregnant woman is PAlother PA, include the unborn in the spouse's or father's MBU. 
2 Do not include an excluded child. 
3 Do not list MBU members In more than one MBU. 
If any MBU has excess property, check lo see if Medi-Cal linkage still exists for olher family members. 
5. Property determinations. enler the allocation for each spouse from MC 324. llne 29. 
6. Enter each person's net nonexempt income from llnes 38 or 39. 
I 0 Property lncome 
I 
MBU NUMBER 
TOTAL 1 
MBUs 0 Property Limit 
Person nameinumber 
MBSAC 
0 Excess properly - FAIL 
0 lncome tnel~g~bllily - affexceeds MBSAC - Property eligible - FAIL 
J lncome eligible - below MBSAC - Property eligible - PASS 
MC 175-31 2R (3100) 1931 Group 
Net Nonexempt 
Page 3 of 4 
MBU NUMBER 
Person namelnumber 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4 
5. 
6. 
TOTAL 
MBUs 0 Property Limit 
O MBSAC 
Check one. 
Pending 
SECTION NO.: 50226 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 234 DATE: 12/1/00 86-44 
Net Nonexempt 
0 Property 0 lncome 
0 Excess property - FAIL 
0 lncome ineligibility - aVexceeds MBSAC - Property eligible - FAIL 
13 lncome elig~ble - below MBSAC -Property eligible - PASS

[page 185]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
%ate d Calcfmra-4iealtt and Human Senices Ag- 
PROPERTY RESERVE WORK SHEET 
Department of Heanh S-er 
Name Case Number - Month 
a. Enter from Cot. I, line C1 
e.g . DMV l~cense 
Encumbrance 
an or equal to C3? IJ Yes 0 No 
Eligibility Worker Signature Worker Number Computation Date County Use 
MC 116 P (71W) 
Pending 
SECTION NO.: 50226 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 234 DATE: 12/1/00 86-46

[page 186]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
PROPERTY RESERVE WORK SHEET-SECTION 1931(b) PROGRAM 
1. Market Value per Sect~on 50412 
2. Encumbrances per Secbon 50413 I- $ 
3. Net Market Value (l~ne 1 mlnus l~ne 2) $ 
4. Ltfe Estate (detennine value per Section 50442 
and procedure 9A) S 
5. Total net nonexempt ORP 
(add l~nes 3 and 4)-Enter In B 1. 
-v~z. .- S 
:"%aC PROPERN RESERVE 5 ' -- ---*--.--- 
1. Total net nonexempt ORP from A 5. $ 
2. Notes, mortgages, deeds of trust owned by 
MFBU member and not produc~ng Income $ 
3. Nonbusiness Itquid assets (money, checktnal - 
savmgs. stocks, bonds) S 
4. lRAs and access~ble KEOGHs $ 
5. Burial plots, vaults, or crypts (not for family use) $ 
6. Excess revocable destgnated bur~al funds 
lover $1500) I $' I 
8. Other countable property (list items) 1 $ 
1 I 
7. Nonexempt vehicles, boats. vans, trailers, etc. 
(I~st items and amounts from MC 176 P-V) 
IJ Did you explain spenddown options to ensure the ability 
931(b) program, determine 
S 
Pending 
SECTION NO.: 50226 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 234 DATE: 12/1/00 8G-47

[page 187]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
Sale of CddabHeanh md Human Services Agmq Depamnrnl d Heakh Se-es 
SECTION 1931 (b) 
SNEEDE V. KlZER 
PROPERTY WORK SHEET 
INSTRUCTIONS 
List all nonexempt property from MC 176P-1931. 
Cwnly use Cse me 
If property is owned by more than one person, equally divide the net market value by the number of owners unless evidence 
is provided to rebut the division. 
Joint bank accounts: If available to anyone in the MFBU, do not count the money in a joint account against the MFBU more 
than once. Equally prorate the bank account among the owners in the MFBU (subject to rebuttal). 
CWI~ bsbin 
Stepparent property is exempt. 
Case mrd 
I. ALLOCATION FROM SPOUSEIPARENT 
Enectave date 
Month Year 
A. For a married couple, enter their total community property in Column 11. Enter each spouse's separate property in 
Column Ill. 
B. For an unmarried couple or a single parent, enter their separate property in Column Ill; leave Column II blank. 
Pending 
SECTION NO.: 50226 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 234 DATE: 12/1/00 86-48 
LISTEXEMPTPROPERTY AN0 
NAME OF OWNER 
11. COMMUNITY 
PROPERTY 
$ 
I. UST DNLY THE PARENTS 
NONEXEMPTPROPERTY 
1. Nonexempt Other Real Property 
2. ChM~ng 
3. Savings 
4. Other 
5. Cash 
6. Nonexempt Vehicle 
7. Other 
8. 
9. 
10. 
11. Subtotal Net Nonexempt Property 
12. Enter each spouse's share of community pfoperty 
(divide line 11. Colwnn 11, by 2) 
13. Parent's total net nonexempt property (add lines 11 and 12) 
14. Number of persons tor whom each parent is responsible 
(see tot& on MC 175-2) 
15. Allocation to each person for whom parent is responsible 
(divide line 13 by line 14) 
Ill. SEPARATE PROPERTY 
Parent A 
$ 
$ 
(A) 
$ 
Enter on line 27. 
Parent B 
$ 
$ 
(B) 
$ 
Enter on line 28.

[page 188]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILIN PROCEDURES MANUAL 
11. ALLOCATION FROM SPOUSE TO SPOUSE (Skip if MFBU does not contain a married couple.) 
Ill. NET NONEXEMPT PROPERTY FOR CHILDREN OR NONPARENT CARETAKER RELATIVE (Do not list unborns.) 
Name of child a caretaker relative 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 
Child's naturaVadoptive parent-see Sedion I 
(circle A or B or both) I A B B I A B I A BIA B 
$ 
$ 
$ 
16. Enter line 15A in both boxes. 
17. Enter line 158 in both boxes. 
18. Total (add liner 16 and 17). This is each spouse's total share of their net nonexempt property. 
(Enter this amount on MC 175-4 in the manied couple's mini budget unit ) 
I I 1 I I 
. . Ltst only the ch11d.s or caretaker relahve's property 1 ", e-c." 'A $. -& < *:;,:, ,< * 
$ 
$ 
$ 
19. Checking 
20. Savings 
23. Other 
21. Nonexempt vehide 
22. Nonexempt ORP 
$ 
I 
28. Allocation from Parent B' I 1 I I I 
$ 
26. TOTAL I I 
Child's naluralladcptive parent-see Section I 
(drcle A or B or born) 6 81A 6 
27. Allocation from Parent A' 1 I I 
- 
29. Net nonexempt property (add lines 26. 27. 
and 28) enter on MC 175312. Part 2. 
Name of child or caretaker relative (continued) 
I 
List only the chdd's or caretaker relative's property *, 
20. Savings 
21. Nonexempt vehicle 
22. Nonexempt ORP 
23. Other 
I 
6. 
26. TOTAL 
27. Allocation tom Parent A' 
28. Allocatia? horn Parent B' 
29. Net nonexempt property (add lines 26.27. 
and 28) enter on MC 175-312. Part 2. 
Enter an allocation from Won I. line 15, only ii this is the chid's naturalladwttive parent. Leave Mank il caretaker relative household. 
7. 
I I 
COMPLETE MC 175-4 NEXT 
Pending 
SECTION NO.: 50226 MANUALLElTERNO.: 234 DATE: 12/1/00 8G49 
8. 
Date 01 cornputailon Elrgbllfy WOrker S~gnature Worker nu- 
9. 10.

[page 189]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
Sate of Caldmta-Heath and Human Serrtces Agency Department of Heal* Sewices 
VEHICLE DETERMINATION WORK SHEET 
FOR 1931 GROUP 
I 
DIRECTIONS I VEHICLE NUMBER ONE I VEHICLE NUMBER TWO / VEHICLE NUMBER THREE 
I I 1 
Case name 
List all vehicles owned by anyone in the MFBU. 
NOTE: Complete additlona! work sheets if more 
than three vehicles. 
Case number 
Make Make Make 
Model Model Model 
Year - 1 Year 
, 
STEP ONE-Only Unkcicensed Wictes on lndian Reservation Which Do Not Require Licensing and An Licensed Vehicks. For A0 
Ofher Mhides, Go to Step Two. 
I I I 
STEP TWO-Only Vehicks Not Exempt in Step One 
I I I 
A vehicle used for any reason listed below is exempt. 
1. On the job or for income producing purposes even if only on a seasonal basis or temporarily unemployed. 
2. Long distance travel essential to individual's employment, e.g., traveling sales, migrant farm worker moving from job to job. 
3. Home (only one vehicle per household). 
4. Transportatjon of disabled individual living in the home. 
5. Transportation of primary fuellwater for the home. 
£3. Licensed Only-If Unlicensed, Go to Step Two (Cf. 
Enter excess FMV (estimate of FMV minus $4.650). 
If zero, then exempt, STOP 
If not zero. go to Step Two (C). 
C. All Remaining Vehicles-Enter encumbrance 
(amount owed). 
D. Determlne equ~ty valve (EV) of vehicle (FMV of vehicle 
from Step Two (A) minus encumbrance in 
Step Two (C)). 
Is vehicle exempt? 
If yes, list reason and STOP. 
If NO, go to Step TWO. 
A. Enter estimate of Fair Market Value (FMV). 
EX~~SS FMV $ I ~xcess FMV $ 1 Excess FMV $ 
0 Yes 0 No 
Reason: 
0 Yes 0 No 
Reason- 
f3 Yes 0 No 
Reason. 
FMV $ 
A. Compare Step Two (B) and Step Two (D) 
Enter the lesser value. 
Amount owed $ 
8. Enter $1.500 in the column under the one vehicle with 
the highest equity value. If excess FMV is the lesser 
amount, enter zero. Enter zero in all columns where 
$1.500 is not entered. 
FMV $ 
Check One 
0 Excess FMV 
FMV $ 
Amount owed $ 
Check One Check One 
0 Excess FMV 0 Excess FMV 
Amount owed $ 
MC 176 P-V (500) 1931 Group 
C Subtract Step Three (0) from Step Three (A) and enter 
result. If zero, then car is exempt. If not zero, then 
enter amount on Property Reserve Work Sheet 
(MC 176 P (Back) 1931). 
Pending 
SECTION NO.: 50226 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 234 DATE: 12/1/00 8G-50 
- $

[page 191]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
TABLE 1: SECTION 1931(b) INCOME LIMITS EFFECTIVE JULY 1, 1999 
Effective 
Section 1 93 1 
Family Size Income Limit** 
1 $390 
'Add $14 dollaiqfor each additional needy persdn over 10. 
" The figures in this column will used for purposes of determining Section 1931 (b) 
income eligibility. If the family's net non-exempt income is less than the amount in this 
column appropriate for that size family, the family is eligible for the Section 1931 (b) 
program. 
C 
Pending 
SECTION NO.: 50226 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 2 6 6 DATE: 4/23/02 8G-51

[page 193]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
Section 1931 (b) ~eterminations: Sneede v. Kizer 
Prorated FPL Income Standard and Property Lev,els 
.y ,,;' P 
- April 1,2002 - 
.,,*-.*:--e<>;<+'-s-$- . - ' ..>-,.y ,-.,. s-.-.v,- -.., .::. ::k.;T*...--..:.$. : .-.. >>.*...;:::-.A-9+* >.*.+9,,- ......;.. :; -<;.< >;5, ;.,,; :+-.,;,3 >., ..:: .->~,*.%*P? ?.,+ .>5:$:;+??:??;F<-F.!p.+-. .**... .cyfi.w-.G<? .:. ,.<. . -.- '. --. ::..< >: :-2 
,... wFg2mu7esqg%bG$i;; d.dt i=; ;G$z;$y"$$:$*G~:+!.:: %::;~~~~~~$~~:;~g4+~~:. .: :.::--;(::;;;.;:::. ., ;>,;; :c : ;+<2.;x -& @>;*.,&.*;:: -;3*.+m*z2, - 5; .~~,~..w,>A~,.~~~~~.,~~. .A* &:a*. ?gn4:&bk$:$&yzgg3::-..:;; -5; ; .: .> ...; < .: ..:- .C...F. >;..3,25 
I I 
Property 
$3,000 
3,000 
3,000 
3,150 
3,000 
1 Person Type 
Single Parent 
Single Parent with Unborn 
Married Couple -Two Adults 
Married Couple with Unborn 
Unrnanied Couple - Each Unrnarried'Partner 
I 
Allow the full non-Sneede Section 193 I@) income/property limits for the MBU based on the number of 
individuals in the MBU. I 
1931(b) Income 
$739 
995 
995 
1,252 
739 
I 
Each MBU receives full non-Sneede 193 I (b) incorne/property limit based on the number of persons in each 
bIBU. If there is a pre~ant minor in the MFBU, include the unborn in the pregnant minor's MBU. 1 
*NOTE: Add $257 for each additional child after 10 to Section 1931(b) income standards to determine prorated income 
standards. No. Children in hlBU X 1931(b) Income Standard for = Prorated income 
Parent(s) + No. Children in MBU Parent(s) + Child(ren) in IIIBU 
No. of Children 
in MBU 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
- 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10' 
Pending .. 
SECTION NO.: 50226 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 2 6 6 ~A~~:4/23/02 86-52 
One Parent Two Parints 
Prorated Income 
$ 498 
835 
1,132 
1 
1,412 
1,685 
1,954 
2,2 19 
2,482 
2,745 
3,006 
Prorated Income 
$ 418 
755 
P 1,059 
1,348 
1,628 
1,902 
2,172 
2,440 
2,705 
2,970 
Prorated Property 
$1 .SO0 
2,100 
2,475 
2,760 
3,000 
3,2 15 
3,413 
3,600 
3,780 
3,8 19 
Prorated Property 
$I .050 
1.650 
2.070 
2.400 
2.679 
2,925 
3,150 
3.3 60 
3,437 
3.500

[page 195]
State of Cal~forn~a-Heanh and Human Services Agency Department of Health Serv~ces 
*Y *> ,- t 
SECTION 1931(b) SNEEDE V. KlZER NET NONEXEMPT INCOME DETERMINATION 
AND MINI BUDGET UNIT (MBU) DETERMINATION - APPLICANT 
I Case Type: APPLICANT OR RECIPIENT USING FEDERAL POVERTY LEVEL (FPL) INCOME STANDARD I 
PART 1 
NOTE: The onty dedudion applicable to Vle Sedion 1931(b) program is the deduction for educational expenses. as provided 
in Sedion 50547. Title 22. California Code of Regulations. 1 
'. Net child/spousal support received. O 
3. lnkind income (IKI). 8 
4. Income available from PAlother PA 
(see MC 1756, line A.4). 
5. Total nonexempt unearned income 
'.%. 
(add fines 1.2. 3. and 4). 
' Sources include: net income from property, Social Security nondisabilii payments etc. 
-0 ChWSpousal Support Child support is in,mme to the child. not to the parent or caretaker relative. 
Payments Received . 9 
OBJide the $50 per month child/spousal support dedudipdby the number of persons for whom the income is intended. 
Any unused remainder win be prorated among the remaining persons who still have support payments lo apply against 
the deduction -*,. 
ENTER NAME OF EACH MFBU MEMBER 
(Do not list unborns) 
Person Type 
O Unearned IKt prorate the unearned IKI among the persons who receive the income. Example: Medical famity budget unl (MFBU) 
- .- of four receives free housing. Use IKJ for four am1 each penon receives owfourth of the IKI. Add an unborn's share 
of IKI to the pregnant woman's share. If the pregnant woman is Public Assistance (PA)/other PA and not in the MFBU. 
give the unbwn's shpre to the father of the unborn if he is in the MFBU. 
Ch~WSpousal support and/or IKI computations:'' 
Na e 
Gth~r 
&rent B OF 
0 Caretaker 
Relative 
Name, 
~~th~ 
dent A or 
0 Caretaker 
Relative 
I 
6 Source and amount of d~sab~l 4ased inw 
Dlsa b. 11 - ~n%r 
4 OiSab, ( f~-&, ~54 
MC 17531 2A (3/M)) 1931 Group Page ? of 4 
Nam#/ 
dd 
- -- 
Pending - 
SECTION NO.: 50226 MANUAL LElTER NO.: 366 DATE: /./72 /n? 86-53 
Name 
0 Child

[page 196]
14. Total countable nonexempt unearned income (line 5). I 
I An > 1 ~AP 1 
KP.' <<- -.+-<- vs---. . , - - - c-, - . - - 
, ~frJoN~~~pr &RN& INCOME -&- T2:: 1: <:- - 5F-~ . - %: -. _/ -.- P- L ,.:.,- -- r+,. , 
, -;w3;>:->:z*-z: - . - ---- =_. 
7 Source and amount of nonexempt earned tnwrne I '9 
(mchde TWC SDI and earned IKI) ,d,-+, 
PO+ - mrthop +child?- 6'60 . 360 
15. Total countable dkabiliry-based income (line 6). ! 1 fi I 1 L" I I 
9 Rema~nlng nonexernpt earned Income 
(subtrad llne 8 from line T) 
10 ChlM care deductton 
11 Olher deducttons 
12. Tolal deduct~ons (add 11nes 10 and 11). 
13 Total net nonexempt earned mnn?e 
(subtrad 11ne 12 from line 9) 
16. Total countable nonexempt eamed in- (line 13). 
17. Income allocated from LTC/B&C person to family 
memben at home (from MC 176W. Part 8. or 
from MC 1757. line C 2). 
90 7L5 
7/8 
18. Total countable ~ncorne (add lines 14.15. 16 and 17). 
MC 175-31 2.4 (300) 1931 Group 
' 
7/0 1 2~0 1 3/(1 1 ydL? 1 J 
9. Court-ordered child suppbrl or alimony. 
LO. Income used to determ~ne PA eligibil'ity 
(see MC 1756. Section 0). 
21. Other deductions: 
22. Total deductions (add lines 19. 20 and 21). 
23. Tolal net countable inwrne (subtrad fine 22 
frcin line 18). Enter this amount on MC 175-4 if 
no parent in MFBU. If parent in MFBU, continue. 
Page 2 of 4 
/ 
.r 
1. 
Pendina

[page 197]
- .. . 
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
PART 2 
/ SECTION 1931(b) MBU DETERMINATION - PROPERN AND INCOME 
dection 1931(b) FPL Income Test 0 Section 1931(b) Property Determination 
Instructions: 
1. lndude unbom in the mother's MBU and property IirnitiFPL inme level unless mother is married, and only her separate children 
want Med~Cal. If the pregnant woman IS PAIother PA. include the unborn in the spouse's or father's MBU. 
2 Do not indude an excluded child. 
3. Do no1 list MBU members in more than one MBU. 
4 If any MBU has excess property. check to see if MedbCal linkage still exists for other famiky members. 
5. Prope* delerrninations: enler the allocation for each spouse from MC 324. line 29. 
6. Enler each person's nel nonexempt income from lines 34 or 35. 
MBUNUMBER / 
Person narm'number ( Net Nonexempl , 
MBU NUMBER 2 
Penon namdnumber I Net Nonexemot I 
I 
Check one: 
D Excess property - FAIL 
6. 
- TOTAL 
I yme ineligibility - exceeds FPL - Property eligible - FAR / 
4r' 
9da L& 
[ hncome eligible - at w below FPL - Property eligbk - PASS I I 
TOTAL I 
I MBus 
0 hope* Limit 
Check one: 
0 Ex~es~ property - FAIL 
iner~ibrri - exceeds FPL - Property ergibk - FAIL 
eligible - at or below FPL - Properly eligiWe -PASS 
MC 175-31 ZA (300) 1931 Group Page 3 of 4 
Pending*. 
SECTION NO.: 50226 MANUAL LETTER NO.: 2 6 6 DATE: 4/23/02 86-55

[page 198]
MEDI-CAL ELIGIBILITY PROCEDURES MANUAL 
e ineligibility - exceeds FPL - Property eligible - FAIL 
1 0 Income eligible - at w below FPL - Property eligible - PASS I 
MBU NUMBER 
Person name/nut%be'r NGI Nonexempt 
0 Property Income 
1. 
, . 2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
TOTAL 
MBUs 0 Property Cmr( 
D FPL 
Chedt one: 
D Excess property - FAIL 
D Income ineligib11,t-y - exceeds FPL - Property erig~bte - FAIL 
D Income eligrbk - at or below FPL - Property eliglMe - PASS - 
I MBU NUMBER 
erson namelnumber 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
. TOTAL 
MBUs 0 property timil 
0 FPL 
Page 4 of 4 
MBU NUMBER j 
Net Nonexempl 
0 Property D lnwrne 
. 
'9 
Person namelnumber 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
r 6. 4 
TOTAL 
MBUS property LA 
0 FPt 
Check one: 
0 EXC~SS property- FAIL . 
.- o lm ineligibiily - exceeds FPL - Property ereible - FAIL 
Income e6gibk - at or below FPL - Property eligible - PASS 
Net konexempt 
~b~~~ Income 
Check one: 
D Excess property - FAIL 
0 Income ineligibility - exceeds FPL - Property eligible - FAIL 
D Inwme eligible - at or below FPL - Property erigible - PASS