[page 1]
National Strategy to Support 
Family Caregivers
Developed by:
The Recognize, Assist, Include, Support, and Engage (RAISE) Act Family 
Caregiving Advisory Council
&
The Advisory Council to Support Grandparents Raising Grandchildren
Originally published in 2022, this document has been updated to comply with Executive Orders 14168 
“Defending Women from Gender Ideology Extremism and Restoring Biological Truth to the Federal Government” 
and 14151 “Ending Radical and Wasteful Government DEI Programs And Preferencing.”
Technical assistance provided by the Administration for Community Living

[page 2]
Contents
Acknowledgements  3....................................................................
Creating the Strategy  ................................................................... 5
A Note on Language  .................................................................. 7
Executive Summary  .................................................................... 9
Background  ........................................................................ 9
Costs of Caregiving .................................................................. 1 0
Purpose of the Strategy ............................................................... 1 1
Components of the Strategy ............................................................ 1 2
A First Step ........................................................................................ 1 3
Introduction  ......................................................................... 1 4
Family Caregiving Today ............................................................... 1 4
A Snapshot of Family Caregivers  ........................................................ 1 6
What Family Caregivers Do ............................................................. 1 7
Congressional Action ................................................................. 1 8
Family Caregiver Needs Requiring Legislative and Other Policy Changes ............................ 1 9
Framework for Systemic Caregiver Support  ................................................. 2 2
Components of the Strategy ............................................................ 2 2
How to Use the Strategy  .............................................................. 2 5
Disclaimer and Limitations ............................................................. 2 7
Goal 1: Increase awareness of and outreach to family caregivers  ................................. 2 8
Goal 2: Advance partnerships and engagement with family caregivers  ............................. 4 1
Goal 3: Strengthen services and supports for family caregivers  .................................. 5 2
Goal 4: Ensure financial and workplace security for family caregivers .............................. 6 9
Goal 5: Expand data, research, and evidence-based practices to support family caregivers ............. 7 8
Conclusion .......................................................................... 8 8
Works Cited  ......................................................................... 9 0
Appendix A: Participating Non-Federal Stakeholders  .......................................... 9 3
Appendix B: Resources Used in the Development of the Strategy ................................. 9 9
Acronyms and Abbreviations  ........................................................... 1 0 0

[page 3]
National Strategy to Support Family Caregivers Page 3
Acknowledgements
The National Strategy to Support Family Caregivers was developed by the Recognize, 
Assist, Include, Support, and Engage (RAISE) Act Family Caregiving Advisory Council 
and the Advisory Council to Support Grandparents Raising Grandchildren (SGRG).
Both councils were formed in 2019; however, this strategy is the result of decades 
of engagement and hard work on the part of policymakers, advocates, philanthropic 
organizations, service providers, and family caregivers.
The members of the two councils would like to specifically recognize five organizations 
that generously provided financial, technical, and practical assistance at every step of 
the development of this strategy:
The John A. Hartford Foundation (JAHF)
National Academy of State Health Policy (NASHP)
Community Catalyst
The LeadingAge LTSS Center @UMass Boston
National Alliance for Car
egiving
In addition, mor e than 150 organizations across the private and non-profit sectors 
provided input in the form of white papers, briefings, and pr esentations or by
 
participating in a series of listening sessions conducted by LeadingAge LTSS 
Center @UMass Boston and Community Catalyst to inform the development of the 
recommended actions. A complete stakeholder list is available in Appendix A.
Multiple federal agencies also contributed to the strategy through participation on one 
or both of the councils and/or by identifying specific actions that they will take under 
existing authorities to contribute to the advancement of a systemic approach to better 
recognize and support family caregivers. The councils would like to recognize the 
following federal agencies that contributed to its development:
AmeriCorps
Consumer Financial Pr otection Bur
eau (CFPB)
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA)
U.S. Department of Education (ED)
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS)
Administration for Children and Families (ACF)
Administration for Community Living (ACL)
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)

[page 4]
National Strategy to Support Family Caregivers Page 4
Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS)
Health Resources and Services Administration (HRSA)
Indian Health Service (IHS)
National Institute on Aging (NIA), National Institutes of Health (NIH)
Office of the Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation (ASPE)
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA)
U.S. Department of Labor (DOL)
U.S. Department of V
eterans Affairs (VA)

[page 5]
National Strategy to Support Family Caregivers Page 5
Creating the Strategy
The National Strategy to Support Family Caregivers (Strategy) is the result of three 
years of focused effort by two Congressionally mandated advisory councils: The 
Recognize, Assist, Include, Support, and Engage (RAISE) Act Family Caregiving 
Advisory Council and The Advisory Council to Support Grandparents Raising 
Grandchildren (SGRG) (collectively referred to herein as the Advisory Councils).
The two Advisory Councils were formed in 2019 to explore and document the 
challenges faced by family caregivers and kin and grandparent caregivers, respectively.
Each was charged with providing actionable recommendations for supporting their 
corresponding caregiving populations in a holistic way both now and in the future. In 
addition, the RAISE Act directed the development of a family caregiving strategy.
 
In 2021, each Advisory Council delivered an initial report to Congress. The reports 
contained recommendations for increasing awareness and outreach; integration of 
caregivers in clinical settings and decision-making processes; expanding the availability 
of services for caregivers; reducing the financial challenges faced by family caregivers; 
and improving data, research, and the use of evidence-informed approaches in the field. 
The reports also offered testimonials from family caregivers to help illustrate why it is 
imperative that the nation do more to support them. During this work, it became clear 
that because family caregiving is such a varied activity that can affect people at any 
stage of life and often requires a wide range of skills and competencies, the best way to 
holistically support all family caregivers would be through a unified effort. As a result, the 
Advisory Councils collaborated to develop the Strategy.
Who are Family Car egivers?
The RAISE Family Caregivers Act defined “family caregiver” as “an adult family 
member or other individual who has a significant relationship with, and who 
provides a broad range of assistance to, an individual with a chronic or other 
health condition, disability or functional limitation.” In its initial report to Congress, 
the RAISE Advisory Council expanded that definition slightly to include unpaid 
individuals of all ages in its definition.
In its 2021 Report to Congress, the SGRG Advisory Council defined “kin and/
or grandparent caregiver” to refer to any grandparent or relative adults who have 
primary responsibility for grandchildren or other children who cannot remain with 
their parents.
In the 2022 National Strategy to Support Family Caregivers, “family caregiver” 
includes anyone meeting those definitions.

[page 6]
National Strategy to Support Family Caregivers Page 6
Setting the Vision
According to the individual statements from Advisory Council members, 
when the goals of the Strategy are achieved, family caregivers of all ages and 
circumstances will be able to:
“Be informed advocates … (and) obtain the services they desperately need to 
survive and thrive”
“Access the right support at the right time”
“Understand that the role (of family caregiver) is a competency
, and their 
success relies on infrastructure available within a community”
“Maintain their own vitality, health, and wellness”
“Pr
otect the bonds of family … and maintain strong family relationships”
“Realize that they are not alone … and become empowered to step forward as 
advocates”
“Navigate services that support their needs for providing a service of care”
“Access emotional and financial support without judgment”
“Reference a living document that reflects shared values”
“Breathe again … ”
In addition, council members noted that supporting family caregivers helps to 
ensur e that the people r
eceiving support maintain their autonomy, independence, 
and right to self-determination.
Their first step was to articulate a shared vision. They began by describing a world in 
which family caregivers have the support needed to provide care without jeopardizing 
their own financial, emotional, and physical stability. Each council member submitted 
statements detailing their individual perspectives on what the Strategy should 
achieve—and the impact on family caregivers if the shared vision were realized. 
Their individual responses reflected the wide range of challenges and joys that are 
experienced by many family caregivers.
It is important to note that the Strategy is focused solely on the populations and issues 
addressed by the RAISE Family Caregiving Act and the Supporting Grandparents 
Raising Grandchildren Act; it does not address every type of caregiving situation. 
For example, although expanding access to affordable, quality childcare is crucial to

[page 7]
National Strategy to Support Family Caregivers Page 7
supporting working parents, and parents are “family caregivers” in the literal meaning 
of the term, that issue is beyond the scope of this strategy.
Similarly, the Advisory Councils recognize that the Strategy does not fully address all 
aspects of family caregiving, as there is no one-size-fits-most solution to addressing 
the needs of more than 53 million individuals providing care in the U.S. Specific 
populations of family caregivers, especially those with more demanding and/or 
complex caregiving responsibilities (described by family caregivers as “more intense” 
responsibilities), likely will need additional support not described in this initial release of 
the Strategy.
A Note on Language
The Advisory Councils recognize that different stakeholder groups that will be served 
by this Strategy use different language to describe the role of a person who provides 
the support another person needs. For example, while many people use the term 
“caregiver,” others prefer to use terms like “care partner” to describe the person who 
provides assistance, and some cultures do not have terms for people who provide 
informal support to others.
Similarly, different stakeholder groups prefer different terms to describe the tasks 
performed by these people to be “care,” while others use “support,” “assistance,” or
 
simply, “help.”
To design a strategy broad enough to encompass all family caregivers and the myriad 
challenges they collectively face (and often overcome) in a manner that honors 
cultural norms and differences, the Advisory Councils blended their individual family 
caregiving-related definitions. This practical approach allowed them to create a broad 
concept that could be applied in a range of circumstances, while maintaining clarity 
for readers of the document. When working directly with individual family caregivers 
and care recipients, or different stakeholder groups, it is important to be aware of the 
wide range of language used to discuss the issues of family caregiving and to make an 
effort to use the language preferred by the individual/groups being addressed.
After thoughtful discussion within the Advisory Councils, which included both 
family caregivers and care recipients from a variety of circumstances, the following 
terminology was selected for the purposes of this document:
“Family” is used in the broadest possible sense to include spouses, partners, 
siblings, friends, neighbors, kin, cousins, nieces and nephews, grandparents, parents, 
godparents, and others.

[page 8]
National Strategy to Support Family Caregivers Page 8
“Caregiving” includes a wide variety of tasks to meet the individual needs of the 
person receiving support. Level of effort can vary significantly—from assistance with 
one (or a few) specific tasks, to live-in assistance that includes medical tasks. It most 
often describes the support provided to help people live in their own homes and 
communities, rather than in nursing homes and other institutions. However, it also 
can include support provided to older people and people with disabilities who live in 
institutional settings.
“Family caregivers” include people of all ages, from youth to grandparents; people 
with and without disabilities; people providing care from a distance; and people 
meeting a wide variety of needs, such as supporting people with intellectual and 
developmental disabilities (I/DD) across the lifespan, caring for people with serious 
and/or progressive illnesses like dementia and cancer, and assisting with daily tasks 
that can be challenging for older people and people with disabilities. The term also 
recognizes that a single person may receive care from multiple family caregivers.
This all-encompassing approach is intended to reflect a vision for a comprehensive 
national response to supporting the nation’s family caregivers.
For more on how the terms used throughout the Strategy were selected, see 
the RAISE Family Caregivers Act Initial Report to Congress and the Supporting 
Grandparents Raising Grandchildren Act Initial Report to Congress.

[page 9]
National Strategy to Support Family Caregivers Page 9
Executive Summary
Background
Every single one of us, if we live long enough, is likely to experience being a family 
caregiver, needing a family caregiver, or both.
Each year, more than 53 million family caregivers provide the majority of support that 
makes it possible for older people and people with disabilities to live in the community 
(AARP and National Alliance for Caregiving, 2020). In addition, at least 2.7 million 
grandparents – and an unknown number of other kin and relative caregivers – carried 
the primary responsibility for caring for children whose parents were unable to do so 
(Annie E. Casey Foundation, 2019). When formal systems of caregiving break down 
(as we saw during the COVID-19 pandemic) or are not available in the first place, 
family caregivers step in—often on short notice—and cover whatever is needed: 
meals, transportation, chores, personal care, education, medical tasks, administrative 
assistance, language translation, and even IT support (AARP and National Alliance for 
Caregiving, 2020).
In short, family caregivers form the backbone of our nation’s system of long-term care. 
They support a wide range of people, with a wide range of needs, such as:
Older adults and people of all ages with all types of disabilities who may 
need assistance with bathing, toileting, dr
essing, and eating (also known 
as activities of daily living) or with things like grocery shopping and meal 
preparation, getting to doctor’s appointments, home maintenance, or managing 
multiple medicines.
People with chronic health conditions—such as cancer, diabetes, and 
arthritis who may need assistance navigating complex health care systems, 
managing symptoms and medication side effects, and maintaining quality of life.
Adults and childr en with I/DD 
who may require assistance with ensuring 
that the individual’s basic needs are met, while their rights are respected and 
pr
otected. They also may need assistance with accessing and coordinating the 
supports needed for health, well-being, independence, and opportunities to 
participate fully in their communities, as well as integrated employment and self-
determination, whether the individual with I/DD is living with the family caregiver 
or in their own home. Parents and other family members of people with I/DD 
often provide medical, behavioral, financial, and other daily supports beyond 
what most families provide, and they provide this assistance across the lifespan 
of the person with I/DD.

[page 10]
National Strategy to Support Family Caregivers Page 10
Children in the full-time care of relatives, such as grandparents or close family 
friends, who may need special education, behavioral health services, and help 
to thrive due to previous adverse childhood experiences.
Medically fragile children and adults who need round-the-clock care from a 
team that includes family caregivers and skilled nursing professionals working in
 
close concert.
Older adults who are affected by Alzheimer’s disease and related dementias 
(ADRD), including people with I/DD, who require assistance with activities of
 
daily living.
Veterans with injuries and/or chronic conditions, including traumatic brain 
injuries, limb loss, and mental health issues like post-traumatic stress disorder 
(PTSD).
People who live in nursing homes, boar
d-and-care, and assisted living 
facilities, and other residential care communities, who r
ely on family caregivers 
for assistance to maintain their health, safety, welfare, and well-being.
This is not an all-inclusive list—family caregivers provide many types of assistance not 
listed here. And, of course, some people supported by family caregivers may fit into 
more than one of these categories.
Costs of Caregiving
While family caregiving can be rewarding and personally satisfying, it often comes 
at significant personal cost to the caregiver (National Academies of Sciences, 
Engineering, and Medicine, 2016). However, those costs—financial, physical, and 
emotional—incurred by family caregivers are hard to measure.
The goal is always to provide support that meets the needs of the individual receiving 
it—as defined by that person—and to allow the individual receiving care to maintain 
autonomy, independence, and quality of life.
To date, data collection efforts have not captured the full range of caregiving. They 
often have been limited to specific caregiving situations, such as post-hospital-
discharge caregiving. Some populations of family caregivers, such as kin and 
grandparent caregivers and long-distance caregivers, are often overlooked. The 
care provided differs from situation to situation and is intentionally tailored - the 
goal is always to provide support that meets the needs of the individual receiving 
it—as defined by that person—and to allow the individual receiving care to maintain 
autonomy, independence, and quality of life. These and other factors hinder the

[page 11]
National Strategy to Support Family Caregivers Page 11
ability to capture the often ongoing, long-term nature of caregiving, especially for care 
recipients with long-term needs, such as those with dementia.
As a result, our knowledge about the impact of family caregiving is limited to selected 
outcomes like social isolation, loneliness, stress, depression, and quality of life. We 
know that family caregivers suffer from higher rates of depression than non-caregivers 
of the same age, and research indicates that family caregivers suffer a mortality rate 
that is 63 percent higher than non-caregivers (Schulz & Beach, 1999).
In recent years, additional attention has been given to measuring the financial impact 
of family caregiving, such as lost wages, reduction in workforce, and the out-of-
pocket costs that caregivers often incur for meals, transportation, medical supplies, 
toys, educational tools, home modifications, and more. Family caregivers lose an 
estimated $522 billion in wages each year due to caregiving, and employers are losing 
an estimated $33 billion per year due to employees’ caregiving responsibilities (Chari, 
Engberg, Ray, & Mehrotra, 2015).
Finally, when the challenges become overwhelming and family caregivers are unable 
to continue to provide support, the person they have been assisting often is left with 
no choice but to enter an institution. In addition to negatively affecting the health and 
well-being of the individual who has moved from the community, institutional care also 
carries a tremendous financial cost—most of which is borne by Medicaid. Ensuring 
family caregivers have the resources they need to continue to support older adults and 
disabled people in the community is critical to containing the rising costs of health care.
Purpose of the Strategy
The range of circumstances faced by caregivers is large, and every family caregiver is 
unique. However, they have at least one thing in common: each deserves and needs to 
be recognized, assisted, included, supported, and engaged.
To address this need, the initial National Strategy to Support Family Caregivers 
(Strategy) was developed in 2022 by the RAISE Act Family Caregiving Advisory Council 
and the Advisory Council to Support Grandparents Raising Grandchildren (SGRG) 
(collectively, the Advisory Councils). It builds upon a framework prepared by each 
council’s 2021 report to Congress to:
Align federal, state, tribal, local, and other stakeholder responses around a 
set of goals and outcomes that ar
e informed by thoughtful recommendations.
Foster collaborations within and across stakeholder groups.
Optimize existing family caregiver support  ef
forts by reducing redundancy, 
improving information sharing, and infusing best practices systemwide.

[page 12]
National Strategy to Support Family Caregivers Page 12
Prioritize efforts to better serve populations of caregivers who have not been 
reached historically.
Ensure that all efforts to uplift caregivers are person- and family-centered, 
trauma-informed, and culturally competent.
Components of the Strategy
In addition to an overarching narrative, the Strategy includes two appendices; lists of 
actions, organized by goal, that can be undertaken by a wide range of stakeholders to 
achieve a vision where people can provide care and support to others without putting 
their own physical, emotional, and financial well-being on hold and at risk.
“Federal Actions” includes 345 commitments submitted by 15 federal agencies to 
support the 2022 National Strategy to Support Family Caregivers. While the federal 
actions are significant, they are constrained by the RAISE Family Caregivers Act 
requirement that they be “within scope of existing programs.” Therefore, the federal 
actions within this strategy are limited to activities possible under existing budgets, 
programs, and authorities.
Note: As the Advisory Councils’ respective reports to Congress made clear, at present, 
there are many identiﬁed needs of family caregivers that are not possible to fully address 
within the scope of existing federal programs. The Advisory Councils identify and describe
for consideration other types of federal actions that would require new legislation under 
Family Caregiver Needs Requiring Legislative and Other Policy Changes .
 
“Actions for Others” includes actions for states, communities, and other stakeholders 
to support car
egivers in ways that are aligned with the Strategy. These actions wer
e 
distilled from eight separate convenings conducted by or on behalf of the Advisory 
Councils to gather, align, and aggregate independent actions that stakeholders can 
take to support the Strategy.
This is the first time that ideas from local and state agencies and nonproﬁt 
organizations are integrated with recommendations for the federal government in a 
combined initiative dedicated to family caregiving.  The development of these lists 
also represents the first time that agencies across the federal government have 
formally worked together to coordinate family caregiver support planning.
For more information on public comments and input from stakeholders that 
informed the development of the Strategy, see Appendix B: Resources used in 
the development of the Strategy.

[page 13]
National Strategy to Support Family Caregivers Page 13
It is important to note that the Strategy is not—nor can it be—a timeline, a set of 
operating instructions, or a how-to manual. The Advisory Councils intentionally 
developed an approach that is flexible and broad; the Strategy presents a menu of 
priority actions organized under outcomes and goals to provide stakeholders with a 
range of options that can be implemented to meet local needs.
In addition to the lists of actions, the Strategy also provides a discussion of cross-
cutting considerations, or “first principles,” that must be embedded in all support to 
family caregivers: person- and family-centered care; the impact of trauma on families; 
and elevating direct care workers as essential partners to the family caregiver.
A First Step
The initial Strategy empowers communities, agencies, and other stakeholder groups 
to select actions for implementation, based on community and family caregiver needs 
and preferences, and in consideration of existing supports already in place, resource 
constraints, and other factors.
The Strategy is a significant milestone in our national effort to improve the way 
we support family caregivers, but it also is only the beginning. This will be a living 
document, updated regularly, based on the ongoing input of family caregivers and the 
people they support; the continued work of the Advisory Councils; communities, states 
and tribes, and federal agencies that are developing, implementing and adapting 
policies and programs to support family caregivers; and other stakeholders. All 
stakeholders are encouraged to look for opportunities to improve collaboration, reduce 
redundancy, and leverage the actions being undertaken by other organizations and/ 
or sectors and to share recommendations to inform the first update to the Strategy, 
which will be published in 2024.

[page 14]
National Strategy to Support Family Caregivers Page 14
Introduction
Every day, millions of family caregivers put their own needs aside, often suddenly, 
to improve and maintain the quality of life for others. They support parents, spouses 
and partners, children with significant disabilities, children who cannot remain with 
their parents, and other family members. Both family caregivers and the people they 
support hail from every corner of the nation and reflect all of society (AARP and 
National Alliance for Caregiving, 2020).
The National Strategy to Support Family Caregivers is dedicated to America’s family 
caregivers. It serves as an initial effort in changing systems so that family caregivers 
can receive the recognition, assistance, and support they deserve while engaging and 
including family caregivers in creating the change they envision.
Family Caregiving Today
According to the National Alliance for Caregiving (NAC) and AARP , at least 53 million 
people provide informal, and usually unpaid, care and support to older adults and 
disabled people of all ages in the United States (AARP and National Alliance for 
Caregiving, 2020). This support makes it possible for millions of people to live in 
homes in the community rather than congregate settings. Family caregivers also 
supplement the care of people who are hospitalized or living in nursing homes and 
other institutional settings (Avison, et al., 2018).
In addition, at least 2.7 million kin and grandparent caregivers have opened their arms 
and homes to millions of children who cannot remain with their parents (Generations 
United, 2018). These numbers are increasing rapidly due to growing populations 
of older adults and people with disabilities (including due to long COVID); the long- 
standing shortage of direct care workers, which has reached crisis proportions during 
the pandemic; the continuing opioid crisis and other issues that are creating thousands 
of new “grandfamilies” each year; and a variety of other factors.
The current U.S. system of long-term services and supports could not continue to 
function without the contributions of family caregivers. In 2017, the annual contribution 
of unpaid care of older adults from family members was estimated to be valued at 
$470 billion (Reinhard, Feinberg, Houser, Choula, & Evans, 2019). Currently, there are 
no estimates for the value of the countless hours that family caregivers devote to other 
types of care—for example, those providing 24/7 care to medically fragile children, 
those supporting the independence of people with I/DD, caregiving youth who help 
parents and grandparents, or family caregivers providing care to more than one person. 
Similarly, it is impossible to estimate the financial value of the care provided by kin and 
grandparent caregivers, many of whom are older adults (Generations United, 2018).

[page 15]
National Strategy to Support Family Caregivers Page 15
From our Listening Sessions
“One of the big stressors was money. Why aren’t we paying our family 
caregivers? Why aren’t we giving them a wage? When you think about any 
stressor they’re having … a lot of it’s going to be ﬁnancially related.”
Despite its many rewards, family caregiving often carries a considerable personal and 
financial cost (National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine, 2016).
These costs have long existed, but they came into the spotlight during the COVID-19 
pandemic, when more people became family caregivers in response to closures of 
formal services and changes in the availability of informal supports (Beach, Schulz, 
Donovan, & Rosland, 2021). These new caregivers quickly began to experience the 
same challenges that have long been a reality for millions of caregivers across the 
nation. Because family caregiving often is time-intensive, and it takes place within 
family and other private spaces, it can leave the people who provide support isolated 
from friends, family, colleagues, and support systems. The pressures of the pandemic 
have only amplified the stress and loneliness that can accompany caregiving.
Many family caregivers struggle to balance their caregiving role with other family 
responsibilities and employment, and they often forgo rest and self-care. They also 
frequently bear out-of-pocket expenses (AARP and National Alliance for Caregiving, 
2020). A 2016 caregiving cost study conducted by AARP found that three-quarters 
of family caregivers surveyed incurred out-of-pocket monetary costs as a result of 
caregiving. The estimated per family spending on family caregiving was roughly $7,000 
per year ($6,594) (Rainville, Skufca, & Mehegan, November 2016). These and other 
challenges can have a long-term effect on caregivers’ health, relationships, mental and 
emotional well-being, finances, and even their ability to provide support over time and/ 
or care for themselves (AARP and National Alliance for Caregiving, 2020).
“The challenges and rewards of family caregiving are much more than any 
research study has ever captured. Families struggle, they look for help and 
support, they laugh, they cry. They do all of this for the family member that 
has the greatest need. Yet, the demands of work and the needs of other family 
members continue. Balancing all of the demands can be overwhelming.”
-Alan Stevens, Ph.D., family caregiver & RAISE Family Caregiving Advisory Council Co-chair
Without the support of family caregivers, millions of people would find themselves 
with no choice but to move to more costly nursing homes and other institutional 
and congregate settings. Millions of children would enter the child welfare system 
(and be effectively in the care of strangers) (Generations United, 2018). In addition 
to having a negative effect on the health and well-being of the people receiving care, 
these changes would come at a significant cost to federal, state, and community

[page 16]
National Strategy to Support Family Caregivers Page 16
social services budgets and the American taxpayer. Not only does the nation owe 
a tremendous debt to its family caregivers, but it has no acceptable alternative to 
family care. Consequently, family caregiving is an urgent public health issue of such 
magnitude that it requires a coordinated, iterative, and cross-sector response.
A Snapshot of Family Caregivers
Family caregivers represent a broad cross-section of the population—people of every 
background and in every corner of the nation are family caregivers (AARP and National 
Alliance for Caregiving, 2020). Family caregivers include spouses, parents, siblings, 
adult and minor children, grandparents and other relatives, and more, and people 
can assume family caregiving responsibilities at any stage of life (AARP and National 
Alliance for Caregiving, 2020).
Some family caregivers assist others out of a wellspring of love and concern. Others 
provide care in response to tradition, culture, family expectations, or other factors 
(Zarzycki, Seddon, Bei, Dekel, & Morrison, 2022). More than half of all family caregivers 
(53%) feel they have no choice in taking on the role (AARP and National Alliance for 
Caregiving, 2020). Often, some combination of these reasons causes a person to 
become a caregiver.
An often-overlooked segment of the caregiving community is children, teens, and 
young adults who care for parents, grandparents, and siblings. Advocates refer to 
these young caregivers as “caregiving youth.” Research on caregiving youth remains 
limited, in part because many families are reluctant to volunteer information (National 
Alliance for Caregiving in Collaboration with United Hospital Fund, 2005). A 2005 study 
found that more than half of caregiving youth help with bathing, dressing, getting in 
and out of beds and chairs, toileting, and feeding. One in six child caregivers helps a 
family member communicate with doctors or nurses, and 15 percent of those aged 
12 and older make calls and engage in care coordination. While data is still emerging, 
research also suggests that younger caregivers are more likely to support someone 
with a behavioral health condition (Reinhard S., et al., 2019).
It is important to note that some populations are disproportionately affected by 
caregiving issues. Although men are becoming family caregivers in greater numbers, 
61 percent of family caregivers are women (AARP and National Alliance for Caregiving, 
2020); caregiving responsibilities often exacerbate the financial security—including 
retirement security—disparities experienced by women. African American and Hispanic 
caregivers are more often in high-intensity care situations than white and Asian 
American caregivers (Choula, Snyder, & The John A. Hartford Foundation, 2020), 
but they also are more likely to report that caregiving provides them with a sense of 
purpose. On the other hand, Asian American and white caregivers report higher levels 
of emotional stress than African American or Hispanic caregivers (AARP and National

[page 17]
National Strategy to Support Family Caregivers Page 17
Alliance for Caregiving, 2020). Hispanic older adults are about one and one-half times 
as likely to have Alzheimer’s or other dementias as compared to older adults who are 
white (Alzheimer’s Association, 2021). The result is that caregiving disproportionally 
affects families of color. For example, Black and American Indian and Alaska Native 
children are more likely to live in grandfamilies (U.S. Census Bureau, 2019).
What Family Caregivers Do
Millions of people are able to live more independently, with dignity and self- 
determination while experiencing a better quality of life thanks to some form of 
assistance from family caregivers.
Today’s family caregivers are often expected to perform highly complex tasks, including 
medical tasks, care coordination, administration, and technological support – activities 
that extend well beyond the help with activities of daily living that were the hallmark of 
family caregiving in years gone by (National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and 
Medicine, 2016). Of the approximately 10.9 million individuals with LTSS needs living in 
the community and 1.8 million nursing home residents, 92 percent receive assistance 
from family caregivers and only 13 percent receive any form of paid assistance (Kaye, 
Harrington, & LaPlante, 2010).
The Advisory Councils convened as a result of these key pieces of legislation 
believe that their efforts are only a first step in creating a systemic approach 
to supporting family caregivers. Given the increasing numbers of older adults 
and people with disabilities and chronic conditions who are anticipated to need 
caregiver assistance in the future, the Advisory Councils contend that in addition to 
the implementation of the Strategy, significant future changes will likely be needed 
in the federal landscape to meet the vision of the RAISE Family Caregivers Act. This 
belief is aligned with public comments received by the councils.
See Family Caregiver Needs Requiring Legislative and Other Policy Changes  
below. For more information on public comments and input from stakeholders, 
see Appendix B: Resources used in the development of the Strategy .
Family caregivers generally provide this support without a formal assessment of their 
needs or the needs of the person receiving support. That means they may have to 
take on tasks they do not know how to do, did not expect to have to do, or do not 
feel comfortable doing. They often have limited access to training or assistance that 
could enable success. They often face legal barriers to providing care, such as when 
a grandparent opens their home to a child but lacks legal custody or the authority 
to make decisions on behalf of the child. This lack of formal recognition creates

[page 18]
National Strategy to Support Family Caregivers Page 18
unexpected challenges with otherwise straightforward tasks such as accessing 
medical care or registering a child for school. Over time, these hurdles can make an 
already complex task both stressful and exhausting and even drain financial resources, 
especially over time.
Congressional Action
To address these complex challenges, and in response to decades of advocacy by 
multiple stakeholder groups, Congress passed the RAISE Family Caregivers Act of 
2017 (P .L. 115-119). The RAISE Family Caregivers Act established the RAISE Family 
Caregiving Advisory Council and directed the development of this Strategy.
In September 2021, the RAISE Family Caregiving Advisory Council released its Initial 
Report to Congress. The report described the current landscape of family caregiving 
and proposed 26 recommendations for how the federal government, states, tribes, 
and communities—in partnership with the private sector—can better recognize, 
assist, include, support, and engage family caregivers. It was informed by over 
1,600 responses to a formal Request for Information (RFI) which were analyzed by 
researchers at UMass Boston and Community Catalyst. The RFI analysis was made 
possible through funding from JAHF. The RAISE Family Caregivers Act Initial report to 
Congress made recommendations that were organized around five key goals:
Improved awareness of and outreach to family caregivers
Involvement of family car egivers in the car
e team
Services and supports for family caregivers
Financial and employment protections
Data, research, and best practices
In a corr esponding ef
fort, in July 2018, Congress authorized the SGRG Act (P .L. 115-  
196). This legislation established a separate Advisory Council specifically to make
 
recommendations and identify best practices to support a unique subset of family 
caregivers, many of whom are also older adults—those who have opened their homes 
to grandchildren or kin who are not able to remain with their parents. Sometimes these 
family caregiving situations are short-term; sometimes they are permanent. Often, they 
involve tremendous grief, loss, financial hardship, and/or trauma—and a resulting need 
for services and support—for both the children and adults involved.
In November 2021, the Advisory Council to Support Grandparents Raising 
Grandchildren released its Initial Report to Congr
ess. The report was informed 
by over 300 responses to a second RFI specifically seeking input on the needs, 
challenges, best practices, and unaddressed gaps experienced by kinship families and 
grandfamilies. The SGRG Act Advisory Council developed a set of goals aligned with

[page 19]
National Strategy to Support Family Caregivers Page 19
those of the RAISE Act Advisory Council, and these goals served as the framework 
for 22 recommendations set forth in its report. The report is a moving testimony to 
the resilience and grit of a generation of kin and grandparent caregivers who have put 
their physical, emotional, and financial well-being on hold to raise children within the 
embrace of loving homes.
A Combined Approach to Developing the National Strategy to Support  
Family Caregivers
As noted, as the Advisory Councils prepared their respective reports in 2021, it 
became clear the parallel statutory requirements between the RAISE and SGRG Acts 
presented an opportunity to bring together the issues of greatest concern to all family 
caregivers in a single, comprehensive response. Without this inclusive approach, there 
would remain the risk of ongoing lack of awareness of certain family caregiving issues 
and continued fragmentation of supports for specific populations. It also highlighted 
the magnitude of the issues facing so many Americans.
The development of the Strategy is an important initial step in identifying and 
addressing the family caregiving challenges most Americans will face in their 
lifetimes—whether providing care for a loved one or needing that care to remain in 
the community. This effort to develop a framework of systemic support for family 
caregivers is the first time that stakeholders representing an inclusive range of sectors 
and stakeholders (including family caregivers and people receiving care themselves)
have collaborated with multiple agencies across the federal government to develop a 
shared path toward this single shared vision: recognition and support for all family 
caregivers, regardless of age, background, circumstance, or location.
Family Caregiver Needs Requiring Legislative and Other  
Policy Changes
The Advisory Councils anticipate that as the Strategy is implemented—and as the 
nation more fully comes to understand and respond to the challenges faced by family 
caregivers—society will embrace the cultural and policy shifts necessary to support 
them. As a result, over time, lawmakers likely will be called upon to propose legislative 
changes to better support family caregivers.
With this vision in mind, the Advisory Councils view this document as a Call to 
Action for lawmakers at the federal, state, and local levels and propose a list of 
recommendations for policymakers and legislators to enhance support for family 
caregivers in ways that are aligned with the Strategy. (See Table 1)

[page 20]
National Strategy to Support Family Caregivers Page 20
Table 1. Legislative and Other Policy Changes to Support Family Caregivers
Legislative or Policy Change
Increase funding for state, territorial, tribal, and local health departments to 
systemically embed family caregiving into public health infrastructure and planning
Provide funding for the development, implementation, and evaluation of a public 
health national and culturally competent awareness campaign regarding caregiving
Update language in existing federal caregiver-related legislation and authorities to 
ensure it reflects the current landscape of caregiving and aligns with the goals of the 
Strategy
Review current requirements of, and funding levels for, federal programs described in 
the Inventory of Federal Caregiver Support Programs & Initiatives
Encourage clinicians and providers to conduct formal assessments of family 
caregiving needs
Create incentives for health care systems to incorporate family caregivers into health 
care decision making for the person receiving care
Encourage Medicaid programs, programs offered by the VA, and Medicare Advantage 
programs to expand community-based long-term care options, including expanding 
self-directed opportunities to allow for the hiring of family caregivers, while also 
funding LTC services at rates that attract and retain a skilled direct care workforce1
Authorize specific benefit expansions in the Medicare program, including for respite, 
adult day services, home modifications, home delivered meals, and other long-term 
services and supports (LTSS) to enable individuals to safely age in place/remain in 
their homes
Increase funding for caregiver support services under the National Family Caregiver 
Support Program (NFCSP), the Lifespan Respite Program, and the Alzheimer’s 
Disease Program Initiative (ADPI)
Create a job classification for direct care workers and standardize training and 
accreditation across states
Establish a federal interagency task force to develop a direct care workforce 
development plan
Change U.S. visa policies to allow au pairs to serve as caregivers of older adults and 
people of all ages with disabilities
Redesign the Medicaid eligibility process so that the care recipient does not have to 
deplete most of their assets to qualify for services and support
Financially support caregiving initiatives through federal funding opportunities, 
including expansion of Older Americans Act and Elder Justice Act funding 
opportunities
Pass federal paid family leave; expand the FMLA to include small employers and a 
broader definition of “family” to include grandparent and kin caregivers

[page 21]
National Strategy to Support Family Caregivers Page 21
Legislative or Policy Change
Include family caregiver out-of-pocket care expenses (products and services) as 
medical expenses eligible for tax credits
Introduce a range of incentives to encourage employers to adopt caregiver-friendly 
practices, including tax incentives
Develop tax deductions for paying for home and community-based services (HCBS),
including by family members who are not claiming the care recipient as a dependent
Amend the Consolidated Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act (COBRA) such that 
when wage earner(s) leave employment to care for family members, their benefits can 
continue at their previous level
Allow family caregivers who leave the workforce for caregiving to accrue Social 
Security credits to qualify for Social Security benefits
Allow kin and grandparent caregivers who have primary responsibility for a child to 
claim the federal Child Tax Credit
Launch a national public long-term care social insurance program that includes 
benefits for kin and grandparent caregivers
Extend health care coverage to children in the care of grandparents and kin who are 
not part of the child welfare system
Convene a task force to develop a consensus definition of family caregiver and 
a standardized set of survey questions that provide a minimum data set on the 
caregiver, person receiving care, and key characteristics of the caregiving situation

[page 22]
National Strategy to Support Family Caregivers Page 22
Framework for Systemic Caregiver Support
The aim of the Strategy is to advance a plan of action leading to recognizing, assisting, 
including, supporting, and engaging family caregivers. The Strategy includes four 
separate components which together provide a framework for making the respective 
recommendations of the Advisory Councils a reality for the nation’s family caregivers.
Components of the Strategy
The Strategy includes four documents. This document provides the narrative 
discussion about how to drive the systemic change needed to take family caregiving 
from the sidelines of modern life to something that is recognized and supported as an 
essential contribution to society.
It describes how to achieve each of the 27 recommendations (restated as outcomes) 
described by the Advisory Councils in their respective reports to Congress. The 
narrative was developed based on transcripts and recordings of Advisory Council 
meetings, the reports to Congress by each council, analysis of the two formal 
public requests for information (RFI) about family caregiving, input from about 150 
organizations through key informant interviews and listening sessions, plus other key 
documents developed to support the work of the Advisory Councils. Appendix B 
includes a list of additional sources that informed the development of the Strategy.
The narrative is organized around three components: Goals and Outcomes to support 
family caregivers, and Indicators of Success.
Goals: Although the language used to describe them differs, the Advisory 
Councils shared five overar
ching goals. These goals provide the framework for 
the Strategy:
Goal 1: Increase awareness of and outreach
Goal 2: Advance partnership and engagement
Goal 3: Str
engthen services and supports
Goal 4: Ensure financial and workplace security
Goal 5: Expand data, r esear
ch, and evidence-based practices
Many of the priority actions in the Strategy support multiple outcomes.  
Stakeholders can increase their impact by adopting actions that are identified in 
this document to support multiple ar eas.
Outcomes
: Based on the combined recommendations in their initial reports to 
Congr ess, the Advisory Councils developed 27 outcomes within the five goals.
 
Within each outcome, the Strategy describes multiple priority actions.

[page 23]
National Strategy to Support Family Caregivers Page 23
Note: The Advisory Councils set forward a comprehensive, multi-sector 
approach to advocate for immediate and long-term changes that will be needed 
to achieve the cultural and systemic changes necessary to address the complex 
nature of family caregiving. In other words, the members contend that no single 
outcome will be sufficient by itself; however, each outcome is a driver of the 
momentum necessary to effect meaningful change.
Indicators of success: With any large-scale undertaking to create change or 
impr
ove how challenges are addressed, a set of guideposts to measure success 
is essential. Following the discussion of each goal and its outcomes, sample 
indicators of success are provided so any sector involved in implementing any 
of the actions can have a set of potential measures for their work.
A separate document, 2022 National Strategy to Support Family Caregivers: Federal 
Actions (Federal Actions), provides 345 federal actions submitted by federal 
departments and agencies as commitments to support one or more of the outcomes. 
This document addresses a key mandate of the RAISE Family Caregivers Act: requiring 
input from federal partners on agency actions that could be used to advance the 
development and implementation of the Strategy.
It’s important to note that for the first iteration of the Strategy, the statute required that 
actions be within current programs.
The federal actions differ from one another significantly by agency, both in scope and 
detail. This reflects differing missions and authorities. Some of the federal actions 
are “new” activities within existing programs. Others are redesigned or reimagined 
from the current state. Additional actions at all levels—and collaboration across 
federal agencies to break down silos and leverage individual agencies’ authorities 
and investments—will be necessary to achieve the vision described in statute and 
articulated by the Advisory Councils.
The wide range of federal responses in the initial Strategy also reflects the complexity 
of caregiver needs and myriad ways in which government programs and initiatives 
have sought in the past to address these issues. The Advisory Councils’ intention 
for the future is that these responses will become increasingly aligned to form a truly 
holistic system of integrated services and supports.
A third document, 2022 National Strategy to Support Family Caregivers: Actions  for 
States, Communities, and Others (Actions for Others), contains a list of more than 
150 suggested actions that states, communities, and other stakeholders can take to 
advance the Strategy’s goals. These practical actions, innovative ideas, and thoughtful 
suggestions represent the most current consensus from across multiple sectors and

[page 24]
National Strategy to Support Family Caregivers Page 24
communities on how best to ignite widespread social change in how the nation honors 
and supports its family caregivers.
Finally, a fourth document, First Principles: Cross-Cutting Considerations for Family 
Caregiver Support, describes essential issues that must be centered in developing, 
delivering, and evaluating family caregiving services and supports:
1. The need for person- and family-centered approaches: As the U.S. builds a 
system of coordinated and interrelated responses to the needs of family caregivers, 
it is important that the family caregivers themselves—not systems or providers—
remain the focal point of each encounter.
2. Trauma and its impact: The experience of trauma in the lives of caregivers and 
the people they support—including recent and decades-old traumas—has an 
impact on the caregiving journey in ways that must be recognized and proactively 
addressed.
3. The direct care workforce: Even though the Strategy focuses on family caregiving, 
the viability and well-being of the nation’s professional caregivers (also known 
as direct care workers, direct service providers, and other similar names) has a 
direct influence on family caregivers, their options, and the quality of care provided 
to support the person receiving care. The COVID-19 pandemic has highlighted 
and exacerbated long-standing challenges faced by this sector. Only through the 
development of a robust, well-trained, and well-paid direct care workforce can we 
ensure family caregivers and the individuals they support have access to reliable, 
trusted, and affordable paid supports and assistance when and where they need it.
Family Caregiving Stakeholders: In addition to the federal government, 
caregiving stakeholders can include states, municipalities, payors, health 
care companies, faith-based communities, philanthropic organizations, public 
relations organizations, caregiver advocates and coalition leaders, organizations 
representing older adults, consumer groups, disability advocacy groups, 
educators, entrepreneurs, technology companies, employers, long-term care 
and health service providers, government (local and state) entities, policymakers, 
health system advocacy organizations, and academia, as well as the people 
supported by family caregivers.

[page 25]
National Strategy to Support Family Caregivers Page 25
How to Use the Strategy
The Strategy was written to address a wide range of potential stakeholders; not all 
outcomes will apply to all stakeholders. Each sector and stakeholder has a role to play 
in implementing the Strategy; the Advisory Councils recommend that each stakeholder 
begin by identifying and prioritizing the goals, outcomes, and actions that they can 
best support.
Every sector also should review the Federal Actions to look for ways to align their own 
actions with federal efforts and funding opportunities to reduce silos and redundancy. 
They should also review Actions for Others to similarly identify opportunities for 
collaboration at the state and local levels.
Finally, because many of the recommended actions will require cross-sector 
collaboration, an important step for all stakeholders will be to begin forming 
partnerships—within and outside their traditional networks—that can be used to 
achieve the goals of the Strategy.
In addition, the Advisory Councils offer the following suggestions for specific 
stakeholder groups:
Academic institutions and researchers can consider the findings in the 
Advisory Councils’ r
eports and the actions presented in the Strategy to 
formulate and advance agendas for research, data gathering, and analysis. 
They also can use this information to develop and disseminate new evidence-
informed or evidenced-based interventions for family caregivers.
Business leaders and employers can proactively champion recognition and 
support of family caregivers acr oss a range of settings using the ideas and
 
suggestions in this document. They may wish to identify actions that would 
enable them to better recognize and support their employees who are family 
caregivers and participate in data collection to ultimately improve workplace 
productivity and strengthen bottom lines.
Health care systems consist of organizations and providers with a shared 
goal of promoting, restoring, and maintaining the health of patients. Such 
systems can use the suggestions that follow to identify ways that the needs
 
of family caregivers can be incorporated into their existing workflows and 
processes, which were designed to solely support patients. They also can 
identify opportunities to include family caregivers and care recipients on 
decision-making boards and incorporate family caregiver awareness into training 
protocols and patient education materials.

[page 26]
National Strategy to Support Family Caregivers Page 26
Child welfare agencies work in communities to strengthen families and keep 
children safe, however, their primary focus is often on children in formal foster 
care situations. The Strategy presents an opportunity to take note of and 
address long-standing gaps experienced by kin and grandparent caregivers 
outside the foster care system. These include improving recognition of kin and 
grandparent caregivers who are outside the formal foster care system and 
increasing access to services and assistance that could improve their ability to 
provide care to children in their homes.
Communities of faith and faith-based organizations (FBOs) are trusted 
sources of information, support, and comfort for millions. By considering 
possible ways they can support the recommendations and actions in this
 
section, FBOs can play an even more meaningful role in the spiritual and 
emotional well-being of the individuals within their congregations and 
communities.
Community-based providers of long-term services and supports play a 
critical role in delivering essential services and supports for family caregivers. 
The recommendations and actions contained in this Strategy of
fer a roadmap 
for their own program development in support of family caregivers.
National, state, regional, and local philanthropic organizations have an 
opportunity to advance recognition and support caregivers by identifying 
opportunities that align with their respective philanthr
opic goals and objectives.
States, tribes, and communities have an opportunity to adopt actions and use 
them to strengthen recognition and programming for family caregivers and for
 
similar state-level strategizing on behalf of caregivers.
Family caregivers, people receiving care, advocates, and members of the 
public can use the document to work with legislators, program administrators, 
employers, and neighbors to adopt and administer person-centered and
 
trauma-informed approaches that are based on caregivers’ documented needs 
and preferences and grounded in cultural humility.
Related Resource: A Roadmap for States
After reviewing the Actions for Others document, states and state agencies should also 
review the extensive six-part RAISE Act State Policy Roadmap for Family Caregivers 
(Roadmap) developed by National Academy for State Health Policy (NASHP) under 
a generous three-year grant from The John A. Harford Foundation (JAHF) and RRF 
Foundation for Aging. The Roadmap was designed in response to the RAISE Act 
Advisory Council’s Report to Congress. Its purpose is to assist state officials to better

[page 27]
National Strategy to Support Family Caregivers Page 27
understand the state policy landscape for supporting family caregivers of older adults 
and to identify opportunities for innovation in their own states. The Roadmap contains 
six stand-alone sections:
Section 1: Public awareness and outreach to family caregivers
Section 2: Engagement of family caregivers in health car
e systems
Section 3A: Increasing access to services and supports 
Section 3B: Strengthening the direct car
e workforce
Section 4: Protecting and enhancing family caregivers’ financial and 
employment  security  
Section 5: Increasing data, research, and evidence-based practices to support  
car
egivers
Disclaimer and Limitations
The development and release of the Strategy is a requirement of the RAISE Family 
Caregivers Act. It is not a budget document and does not imply approval for any 
specific action under Executive Order 12866, the Paperwork Reduction Act, or any 
other statute. The federal actions presented in the Strategy are subject to budgetary 
constraints and other approvals, including the weighing of priorities and available 
resources by the administration in formulating its annual budget and by Congress in 
legislating appropriations.
The Advisory Councils believe the Strategy presents a vision for meaningful change. 
While the Advisory Councils believe the recommendations for the federal government, 
states, communities, and other stakeholders are ones that have the strongest 
potential to positively impact the pressing public health issue of caregiver support and 
recognition and are necessary, the Advisory Councils do not have authority to require 
adoption by any agencies or entities.
The RAISE Family Caregivers Act calls for periodic updates to the Strategy. Comments 
on the Strategy are welcome and will play an important role in the first update. The 
Strategy will be formally open for comment for 60 days shortly after its release, and 
there will be additional opportunities for public input as the next iteration is developed.

[page 28]
National Strategy to Support Family Caregivers Page 28
Goal 1: Increase awareness of and outreach to 
family caregivers
Caregiving is a public health issue that receives inadequate recognition, and family 
caregivers are often the hidden heroes of the health care, long-term supports and 
services, and the child welfare systems. Improving support for family caregivers 
requires increased awareness of the roles they play and the challenges they face. In 
addition, there are many people providing support to loved ones who do not think of 
themselves as “caregivers;” they need to be empowered to identify the crucial role they 
play so that they can receive available training and assistance if they need it. Reaching 
these populations, those who have typically not had access to services, will require 
focused efforts to overcome mistrust of institutions, systems, and governments and 
use of culturally competent approaches. The Advisory Councils recognize that these 
efforts must be iterative. However, in coordination with the achievement of other goals, 
they will pave the way for greater recognition and support of family caregivers and 
better participation by caregivers in existing systems.
In any approach designed to increase awareness of family caregiving, communications 
channels and methods must reflect the communities for which the message is 
intended. Such outreach efforts should be coordinated across the public and private 
sectors with consistent overall themes, but the actual messages must be customized 
to meet the needs of local communities. It is also important to ensure that all 
language, pictures, graphics, videos, and other communications included in outreach 
materials promote a sense of safety, trust, and empowerment and can be understood 
by a wide variety of audiences. They should be created in partnership with their target 
audiences and take into consideration the language preferences, cultural values, 
historical circumstances, and types of family caregiving typical in each community. 
Because not all caregivers have access to the Internet, dissemination methods should 
be broad (e.g., electronic/web-based, in-person, print, podcasts, etc.).
Outcome 1.1: Americans are educated about and understand the 
experience of family caregiving.
From our Listening Sessions
“Now is the time to address this issue. Caregivers are a national gem or a 
resource. Without them, it would cost us, I don’t know how many billions more 
dollars than it is costing us right now … You’re going to be in real trouble 
America, if we don’t do something sooner … at the top of my list is to have  
some campaign so that we could turn on every TV station, open up  
Facebook, Twitter and just this would be an omnipresent message t 
hat we have to do something now.”

[page 29]
National Strategy to Support Family Caregivers Page 29
The Any Care Counts campaign is a caregiver identification campaign to 
recognize and support unpaid caregivers in Massachusetts by connecting them to 
available support resources in the state. It also includes free access to a culturally 
competent caregiving intensity index developed by ARCHANGELS.
Despite its many benefits to individuals and society, widespread public understanding 
of the breadth, depth, and complexity of family caregiving across the care continuum 
remains inadequate. Too often, caregivers report only learning exactly how complex 
it is after finding themselves unexpectedly plunged into the role. Even medical, 
educational, legal, financial, and social services professionals sometimes fail to fully 
comprehend the many needs, issues, and challenges faced by family caregivers. Such 
limited awareness is a partial contributor to many of the challenges faced by family 
caregivers, such as being excluded from care settings and health records, limited 
training and support, inadequate research, and inconsistent definitions and data.
Awareness Campaign
The priority action under Outcome 1.1 is a national, multi-pronged information 
campaign designed to bring family caregiving out of the shadows and make it a dinner 
table conversation in every home across the nation and respected at all points of 
service. It should also serve as a reminder that each of us will likely experience 
being a family caregiver, needing a family caregiver, or both at some point, and the 
best way to prepare for that eventuality is through planning now.
Because every family and community is unique, the campaign should offer a playbook 
with customizable, plain language messaging that can be adapted for specific 
segments of the population and reproduced in a range of accessible formats. Such a 
tool will include culturally competent messages that recognize that not all terms and 
recommendations resonate with different populations. All public campaigns should aim 
to increase family caregiver self-identification by highlighting all caregivers and caregiving 
situations. They should also emphasize that while family caregiving can be emotionally 
rewarding, it often comes at an emotional, physical, and financial cost to the caregiver.
Ideally, the campaign should be led at the national level through a public-private 
partnership in coordination with the federal government. This approach will ensure 
unified messaging, consistent data and evaluation, and uniform definitions of 
caregiving. It also will allow for integration of lessons learned and data from previous 
successful national education and awareness campaigns.
Civic organizations and businesses can help to advance the awareness campaign 
and boost general awareness of family caregivers by incorporating its messaging 
about the role and value of family caregivers into existing materials, work products, 
and business practices. For example, community organizations can blend messaging

[page 30]
National Strategy to Support Family Caregivers Page 30
from the campaign with local data about caregiving needs to develop a mini campaign 
to recruit and mobilize volunteers to assist family caregivers in the community and 
promote local caregiver support resources. They also can conduct needs assessments 
as a first step in developing future tools and resources for local family caregivers. 
Philanthropic and faith-based organizations can adapt the campaign to create family 
caregiver support activities that reflect the preferences and values of their respective 
communities. Meanwhile, schools can ensure language on intake forms, websites, 
and other materials ensure kin and grandparent caregivers are represented in the 
language and imagery. This will help to raise awareness of the fact that many children 
today live with kin and grandparent caregivers. Finally, businesses that are open to 
the public, like coffee shops, restaurants, and retail stores, can incorporate caregiver 
awareness messaging into their own advertising, signage, store promotions, and staff 
trainings. This will ensure frontline staff, managers, and even other customers can 
recognize and respond appropriately to family caregivers they encounter in the course 
of a day. (Also supports Outcome 3.5) An additional benefit of raising awareness of 
caregiving in professional settings is that it also has the potential over time to increase 
awareness among employers of the needs of their staff who are also caregivers. These 
can include flexible work hours, time off on short notice, and paid leave for caregiving. 
(Also supports Outcome 4.2)
The campaign should be grounded in national, state, and local data about caregiving 
based on research and data collection activities described in Outcome 5.1. It should 
be timed to capitalize on existing caregiving-related observances such as National 
Family Caregivers Month or National Kinship Care Awareness Month.
Family Caregiving Information Platform
The awareness-raising campaign should include a central communications platform, 
ideally hosted by or in collaboration with the federal government. This platform would 
provide public and private entities a curated array of consistent family caregiving 
resources, data, quality indicators, caregiver identification tools, model policies, 
training materials, technical assistance, learning collaboratives, and a mechanism 
for finding available services and supports in the local community. Family caregivers 
themselves should also have access to this platform so that they can use it to share 
experiences and insights with one another. The existence of a centralized family 
caregiving information platform will ensure that users receive cohesive definitions, 
messaging, and resources in a single location. Meanwhile, campaign supporters and 
state governments would also have access to toolkits, talking points, and templates 
that could be adapted for local populations. National, state, regional, and local 
philanthropic organizations may wish to consider funding collaboratives to develop 
toolkits, templates, and related training materials that can be featured on the platform 
to support enhanced outreach and awareness. (Also supports Outcomes 1.5, 3.1, 4.1, 
5.1, and 5.3)

[page 31]
National Strategy to Support Family Caregivers Page 31
As part of their participation in the national campaign, states may wish to conduct 
environmental scans to better understand the programmatic landscape for family 
caregivers at the state and local levels. Using the results from state programs and 
initiatives to support caregivers, states and their respective managed care plans may 
wish to create or enhance resource guides for health care systems, social service 
providers, and other stakeholders.
Outreach to Hard-to-Reach Populations
In addition to a general awareness-raising campaign, targeted outreach should focus 
on populations facing additional barriers that increase the challenges associated 
with family caregiving. These include kin and grandparent caregivers raising children 
impacted by trauma, family caregivers impacted by mental illness and/or substance 
use disorders, caregivers with disabilities, and caregiving youth. Targeted outreach 
should include federal outreach to states and grantees about available programs 
and initiatives to support caregivers along with outreach by states, communities, and 
professional associations, customized messages to the needs and preferences of the 
populations reached by each. States can also support the capacity of community-
based organizations to conduct outreach and to help family caregivers to navigate the 
service delivery system.
Outreach to Professionals
A parallel campaign also should be initiated at the national level to educate 
professionals across a wide range of sectors who interface with family caregivers in the 
course of their work to improve their ability to identify and support family caregivers. 
These include, but are not limited to, medical, education, finance, and social services 
professionals. The campaign for professionals should also have a playbook that 
contains messages and content that can be adapted for specific audiences. This 
would allow for focused, but equally aligned, sub-campaigns that could educate a host 
of professionals often overlooked in education efforts that focus on family caregiver 
support. These can include retail workers, hospitality professionals, legal professionals, 
and public safety officers. Finally, community-based organizations should consider 
targeted information campaigns, using local data, to educate their elected officials and 
policymakers about issues related to caregiving. (Also supports Outcome 1.5)
Both the public and the professional campaigns should provide non-copyrighted 
images, graphics with imagery that reflects all family caregivers, and text that can 
be quickly adapted by other stakeholders. These materials should represent family 
caregiving as a broad experience that can affect anyone at any stage of life. It is critical 
to ensure that materials are accessible to and include and reference—through both 
language and images—all populations of caregivers. Finally, because family caregiving 
is constantly evolving, all outreach should be regularly reviewed and updated to ensure

[page 32]
National Strategy to Support Family Caregivers Page 32
messaging is current, appropriate, relevant, and reflective of available supports in the 
state and/or community. As part of this, it is important to remember that ensuring 
language access goes beyond word-for-word translation into other languages; the 
message itself should be vetted to ensure that it resonates with the intended audience. 
(Also supports Outcome 1.3)
This case study includes lessons learned and details from the national campaign 
to promote CMS’s Medicare & You and the development and launch of  
Medicare.gov in 1998. The outreach plan also included campaigns adapted to the 
needs of local populations.
More Than Words
All sectors can explore other approaches for raising awareness of family caregiving. 
One example is to adopt the inclusive and broad definition of “family, kin, and 
grandparent caregiver,” as statutes and regulations permit, and to participate in, or 
initiate, observances related to family caregiving.
To further integrate the experience of family caregiving into all aspects of day-to-
day life, local government entities and providers of supportive services for family 
caregivers, such as respite care, can partner with local media (TV, radio, print) to 
increase the prevalence of stories about caregiver experiences and to highlight 
available programs and services. (Also supports Outcomes 1.3 and 3.1) Greeting card 
companies, realtor associations, restaurants, and others could incorporate appropriate 
and evidence-based caregiver support in their products and services and employee 
training. (Also supports Outcome 5.3)
Retailers can offer caregiver discounts for select goods and services that can make 
family caregiving easier, or explore other ways to offset the expenses associated with 
family caregiving. (Also supports Outcome 4.1) Libraries can curate a “family caregiver 
corner” with books, films, resources, and other information specifically for or about 
family caregivers. Libraries also can devote time and space to offer family caregivers 
the opportunity to learn how to do online searches for information, training, and other 
resources to support their responsibilities. Communities of faith can create or expand 
“family ministries” to include family caregiving as a special focus. They also can hold 
special “caregiver outreach and recognition days” for their congregants at which local 
service providers can provide information about available services and supports. 
Schools can use “backpack campaigns” to include information about available services 
and supports for caregiving youth and/or for grandparent and kinship caregivers.
Area agencies on aging, state DD Councils, and other organizations in the aging and 
disability networks can ensure that staff are aware of available family, kinship, and

[page 33]
National Strategy to Support Family Caregivers Page 33
grandparent caregiver support programs and services and trained in the importance of 
proactive caregiver identification and referral.
Aligned Actions
Federal agencies have committed to 51 specific actions within the coming years in 
support of Outcome 1.1. See “Actions for Others” for more than 50 additional actions 
that states, communities, and other stakeholders can take to support Goal 1.
Outcome 1.2: Caregiver self-identiﬁcation and knowledge of services is 
enhanced.
From our Listening Sessions
“ … I keep using the analogy, until the word ‘caregiver’ resonates like  
the word ‘parent’, it’s really hard to enforce things because not  
everybody’s talking about the same thing...Until there’s that knowledge  
base about what these caregivers are and the support they need,  
I don’t think the sticks and carrots really matter … ”
Many family caregivers assist others for years without realizing that their efforts 
extend beyond typical relationship expectations. By the time they realize that they are 
caregivers, they have often missed critical opportunities to learn family caregiving skills 
that could enable them to provide care while maintaining their own health and well-
being. To address low rates of family caregiver self-identification, and in turn increase 
access to beneficial services, the Advisory Councils, using input from the key informant 
interviews, stakeholder listening sessions, and two formal requests for public input, 
identified three priority actions for boosting caregiver self-identification and knowledge 
of services.
Help Family Caregivers Self-Identify
The first priority action is to develop simple family caregiver self-identification tools 
that can be widely adopted. This could be a consistent question embedded in existing 
workflow, such as “do you help someone with shopping or daily activities?” Health 
care systems, social services agencies, schools, employers, and others should 
investigate and identify ways such tools can be incorporated into current processes 
to increase timely identification of family caregivers. For maximum impact, these tools 
should be promoted and used across all programs, regardless of funding source, and 
made available in conjunction with a multi-model public awareness campaign. (Also 
supports Outcome 1.1) To further boost caregiver self-identification, the broadest 
possible definitions of “family” should be used to include friends, neighbors, and 
others. This will ensure self-identification tools and related promotional materials are 
inclusive of families across a wide range of circumstances and communities.

[page 34]
National Strategy to Support Family Caregivers Page 34
Accessing Services
As people become aware of their role as family caregivers, it is critical that they learn 
about services and supports available to them within a short period of time. These 
self-identification tools should also include information on how/where to access 
services and supports in a particular state or community. Messaging conducted 
as part of other outreach campaigns about available services and supports should 
speak to this growing awareness and understanding of the importance of proactive 
and early requests for help. Hospitals/health care providers can conduct outreach 
to their patients’ families to help them self-identify as family caregivers as part of 
their discharge planning, and in tandem with the CARE Act. (Also supports Outcome 
2.4) Kinship care programs can periodically review their outreach and awareness 
programs to identify opportunities for improvement in helping new kin and grandparent 
caregivers self-identify as such. (Also supports Outcome 3.10) States can also look for 
opportunities to support community- and faith-based organizations in their efforts to 
boost self-identification in communities that typically do not recognize their efforts as 
part of family caregiving and, as a result, do not typically receive supportive services.
Partnering with Providers and Industry
Service providers have an important role in developing content, materials, and services 
specifically for a population of newly identified family caregivers. Professionals who 
engage with family caregivers must receive continuing education about available 
services and supports. They also must be prepared to respond to family caregivers 
with referrals to service providers that have the skills and knowledge to address 
their particular needs. This will require investments in combining information about 
family caregivers with existing continuing education, professional reading, conference 
materials, and certification/licensing requirements across a range of professions (e.g., 
medicine, law, education, social services, public services, and the hospitality industry).
The family caregiver stakeholders interviewed by UMass Boston and Community 
Catalyst agreed that the platform described in Outcome 1.1 could offer information to 
the public and serve as a vehicle for educating professionals on caregiver identification 
and the family caregiving experience. Ideally it would feature training modules for 
employers and health care providers and other professionals who interact with family 
caregivers. These trainings would provide guidance and best practices on how they 
can support family caregivers in their respective environments. They could also include 
testimonials and stories to help professionals empathize with the experience of family 
caregiving. Such an initiative is more likely to be successful with widespread buy-in 
and engagement of partners across sectors of the U.S. economy.

[page 35]
National Strategy to Support Family Caregivers Page 35
Aligned Actions
Federal agencies have committed to 23 specific actions within the coming years in 
support of Outcome 1.2. See “Actions for Others” for more than 50 additional actions 
that states, communities, and other stakeholders can take to support Goal 1.
Outcome 1.3: Outreach to family caregivers is improved.
From our Listening Sessions
“I think one of the things that needs to happen is redeﬁning and being more 
holistic about what we mean by ‘outreach’.”
Family caregivers responding to the two public requests for information and the 
participants in the stakeholder listening sessions repeatedly described the above-
noted challenges in finding family caregiving assistance. Many reported they learned 
too late about services—such as respite care—that could have helped them. Some 
caregivers were unaware of services because they have difficulty finding non-English 
language materials.
At present, while some supportive services for family caregivers are available, many 
caregivers are not aware of them—especially individuals who are new to the family 
caregiving role. By the time they come to learn about these services, they often find 
that they cannot access them for a host of logistical reasons (e.g., cost, scheduling, 
distance from home/work, lack of availability of child care or respite services, or they 
are not culturally competent). (The centralized family caregiving platform described 
under Outcome 1.1 can also help to address this issue.)
Kinship navigators provide kin and grandparent caregivers in many states with 
a menu of trusted options and support and help to prevent unnecessary entries
 
into foster care. They provide a model that should be translated across a range of 
sectors to increase effective outreach to caregivers in other caregiving situations.
A Needed Shift
For supports to become more widely reachable across the population, the nation 
must accept and acknowledge family caregiving as a universal experience. Only 
then will family caregivers themselves feel comfortable asking for and accepting 
assistance and accommodations for family caregiving. Professionals with whom they 
interact might also be better prepared to respond in a way that is meaningful. To 
provide the much-needed “course correction” for the many family caregivers who 
remain unreached by current outreach efforts, the Advisory Councils, using input 
from the key informant interviews and stakeholder listening sessions and the results

[page 36]
National Strategy to Support Family Caregivers Page 36
of the RFIs, identified three linked actions, the outcomes of which will collectively 
increase outreach to populations of family caregivers that often are missed in current 
outreach efforts.
Researchers, health care and social services systems, and federal and state 
agencies can use a series of coordinated national and local information-gathering 
efforts to better understand and document the needs of specific populations and 
how best to reach them. (Also supports Outcome 5.1) The results of these efforts 
can then inform the development of outreach campaigns by different sectors 
that could dramatically increase awareness of family caregiving—especially in 
communities that typically do not receive caregiver support services.
Stakeholders across all sectors may wish to recruit and/or partner with trusted 
members of various communities to create a communication path between family 
caregiving communities and service providers. Examples include community health 
workers, peer health educators, promotoras, community resource coordinators, 
faith leaders, advocates, and trusted service providers such as barbers/
hairdressers, teachers, cab drivers, librarians, and pharmacists. States, philanthropic 
organizations, and other funders can support these efforts by funding community-
based organizations to conduct outreach and help family caregivers navigate service 
delivery systems. Primary care physicians, pediatricians, gerontologists, and similar 
medical providers can further support this by partnering with community-based 
organizations and FBOs to offer wrap-around caregiver support to their patients. 
Health care systems that are already offering navigation services related to family 
caregiving support during discharge planning may wish to share best case practices. 
As more people begin to recognize themselves as caregivers, all sectors should 
take steps to ensure caregivers know (before they are in crisis mode) about—and 
have access to—person- and family-centered, and trauma-informed programs and 
services that are designed to meet the needs of the local community. (Also supports 
Outcome 3.1)
Aligned Actions
Federal agencies have committed to 10 specific actions within the coming years in 
support of Outcome 1.3. See “Actions for Others” for more than 50 additional actions 
that states, communities, and other stakeholders can take to support Goal 1.
Outcome 1.4: Family caregiving—and caregivers—are embedded in 
federal, state, territorial, tribal, and local planning.

[page 37]
National Strategy to Support Family Caregivers Page 37
From our Listening Sessions
“I would love to see something that links people in a system and then  
can take them to their local communities … If we can connect people to services 
… It’d be nice to have a national [website] that was not for proﬁt, and  
then got people to the right place.”
While family caregivers and the people they support are sometimes included in the 
planning and policy development processes undertaken by federal, state, territorial, tribal, 
and local governments and other planning entities, this is not yet consistent across the 
nation. As a result, their needs are not fully understood or addressed. Sometimes, efforts 
to support family caregivers focus only on the caregiver and do not consider the needs of 
the person receiving care. Some efforts consider only speciﬁc family caregiving situations, 
such as supporting older adults, and the needs of other caregivers are left out. To truly 
change systems in a way that ensures families are supported across the lifespan and 
across family caregiving situations, caregiver voices and perspectives must be an integral 
part of planning efforts at all levels of society and government.
Reaching All Communities
Some populations of caregivers have traditionally been underrepresented in efforts to 
support caregivers, including caregivers of color and family members of people with I/DD. 
State and local governments, as well as providers of services, should ensure that everyone 
can access caregiver support. Such an approach will allow for more perspectives and 
input in any proposed change to ensure the needs of all family caregivers—including those 
who support people with disabilities—are included. Ways to do this include:
Developing a language and communication access policy and plan,
Adopting an ambassador pr
ogram to create conduits between decision-making 
councils and communities, and
Increasing representation of people with family caregiving experience on 
decision-making bodies.
Charting the LifeCourse, developed by Missouri Family to Family, provides 
guidance on delivering services for people with I/DD in ways that respect their 
cultural and personal preferences and needs.
California’s Master Plan for Aging was developed through a range of stakeholder 
engagement initiatives including surveys, community events, webinars, legislative 
roundtables, and the creation of three advisory bodies comprised of subject 
matter experts, providers, and the public.

[page 38]
National Strategy to Support Family Caregivers Page 38
Those states that do not yet have in place a deliberative body specifically charged 
with considering the needs of caregivers, may want to consider establishing one (with 
caregiver representation, of course) to ensure that caregivers have a voice in planning 
and policymaking regarding services and supports. To increase contacts with groups 
that do not typically receive caregiver services, state and local entities are encouraged 
to ensure that planning efforts specifically include actions that support people who 
experience multiple forms of discrimination and who may face additional barriers 
because of disability status, race, ethnicity, sex, sexual orientation, and national origin 
(including limited English proficiency).
To reduce redundancy, state and local caregiver-related planning initiatives should 
be aligned with the Strategy. That means using consistent definitions of caregivers 
as described under Outcome 5.1, adopting the broadest possible definition of 
“family caregiving” across all external messaging (e.g., related to education, health, 
social services, child welfare, legal, financial), and developing state and community 
playbooks that support the Strategy.
Aligned Actions
Federal agencies have committed to 13 specific actions within the coming years in 
support of Outcome 1.4. See “Actions for Others” for more than 50 additional actions 
that states, communities, and other stakeholders can take to support Goal 1.
Outcome 1.5: Public-private partnerships at all levels help drive family 
caregiver recognition and support.
From our Listening Sessions
“We have ambassadors, we have champions, but when you talk about the 
systems that those individuals have to then go and … liaison between,  
that doesn’t carry a lot of weigh… these need to be empowered paid 
administrators, managers, directors, within these communities that hopefully 
come from these communities so that they know what’s available.”
Achieving national cultural change requires more than just the efforts of the federal 
government. To create a system that supports families, multiple sectors—both 
public and private—must work together. No single sector can do it alone. The RAISE 
Family Caregivers Act identified multiple areas of focus for the Strategy that would 
benefit from partnerships between public and private stakeholders. Benefits of such 
collaborations can include development of key products that would be difficult to 
capture otherwise (e.g., some kinds of research data); engagement of entities not 
traditionally focused on family caregiving (e.g., large employers), and an increase in 
awareness, protection from discrimination, and understanding of the issues facing 
family caregivers and the benefits for those who support them.

[page 39]
National Strategy to Support Family Caregivers Page 39
Wherever possible, opportunities to leverage the combined wisdom, talent, and 
resources of the public and private sectors should be explored. The family caregiving 
information platform described in Outcome 1.1 is just one of many components of the 
Strategy that would benefit from broad public-private collaboration. While providing 
public resources, data, and information developed by federal, state, and other sources, 
the platform could also include training modules for a range of audiences about how 
to support family caregivers. These materials ideally would be developed in the private 
sector, with input from across various sources, to maximize the ability to align innovative 
training techniques with the goals of the Strategy. To increase alignment, federal 
agencies participating in such an effort can disseminate information and lessons learned 
back to the Advisory Councils for integration in future iterations of the Strategy.
State Planning
When state agencies develop federally mandated state plans (e.g., Medicaid state plans, 
state plans on aging, disability service plans, and state assistive technology plans), 
particularly those that address the needs of caregivers, public-private partnerships, 
particularly those that include employers and health care providers should be included 
into the planning process. In support of this, state units on aging, state councils on 
developmental disabilities, centers for independent living, and other community-based 
organizations can establish collaborations with major employers and state, regional, 
and local philanthropic organizations to create family caregiver coalitions with dedicated 
funding and projects in place to support family caregivers. (See Goal 4)
Aligned Actions
Federal agencies have committed to 17 specific actions within the coming years in 
support of Outcome 1.5. See “Actions for Others” for more than 50 additional actions 
that states, communities, and other stakeholders can take to support Goal 1.
The Massachusetts Caregiving Initiative is a public/private partnership to 
drive innovation in caregiver support. Its coalition of more than 30 member 
organizations has launched a wide range of data-driven tools and resources to 
benefit caregivers in the state since 2019.
Indicators of Success: Outreach and Awareness
As the actions under Goal 1 are implemented and each of the outcomes is attained, 
family caregivers will experience greater recognition as the following social changes 
take place:
Society increasingly recognizes, appreciates, acknowledges, and celebrates the 
contributions that family car
egivers make to the lives of others.

[page 40]
National Strategy to Support Family Caregivers Page 40
When caregivers seek assistance, they have trusted and easily accessible 
sources of reliable, appropriate, and actionable information regarding available 
services and supports.
More people understand and appreciate the challenges caregivers face.
Caregiver identification (including self-identification) increases.
Family car
egivers feel more comfortable seeking assistance.
Family caregivers participate actively in federal, state, territorial, and tribal 
planning.
Family caregivers are recognized as subject matter experts on caregiving and 
sought out for input and guidance by decision-making authorities.
Employers recognize the roles, responsibilities, and needs of employees who 
are caregivers and offer flexible policies (telework, flex time, paid leave) so that
 
they can conduct caregiving responsibilities under unexpected or emergent 
situations without risk of losing employment.
Family caregivers in communities that have not typically received caregiver 
support services have increased access to services because of improved  
outr
each from those services.
Professionals across a wide range of fields routinely recognize family caregivers 
when they meet them and are prepared to r
efer them to services and supports 
that are designed to meet their needs.
Greater awareness of family caregiving and expanded outreach and education 
leads to measurable increases in caregivers’ physical, emotional, and financial 
well-being.
Accurate r
epresentations of family caregivers and the people they assist are 
increasingly reflected in media, advertising, and the arts.

[page 41]
National Strategy to Support Family Caregivers Page 41
Goal 2: Advance partnerships and engagement with 
family caregivers
Family caregivers are called upon to play an integral role in the support, care, and 
well-being of others. Yet, the systems with which they are regularly required to 
engage (e.g., health care, long-term services and supports, education, child welfare, 
legal systems, etc.) are often burdensome, complicated, time-consuming, minimally 
responsive, and confusing. They often do not value the crucial nature of the role 
caregivers play, do not recognize their experiences or expertise, and do not consider 
their time or needs. This was seen regularly during the COVID-19 pandemic, when 
family caregivers who were essential to the care of hospitalized patients were excluded 
from medical facilities because they were regarded as guests.
A holistic, person- and family-centered caregiver support system is one that—with 
the consent of the person receiving—carefully integrates the family caregiver into 
care processes within existing systems. At a minimum, they must be included in the 
aspects of decision-making and planning that affect them. The Advisory Councils 
developed five outcomes related to ensuring family caregivers are involved in the 
service systems with which their care recipients most often interact: health care, 
education, and social services. These outcomes reflect a future where approaches 
to care are no longer developed with the assumption that family caregivers will take 
on challenging tasks and roles without their consent or full understanding. Over time, 
and in coordination with the achievement of other goals, they will pave the way for 
partnerships and engagement of family caregivers that enable them to provide better 
care for as long as possible, to share information about the individuals receiving their 
care, and to receive appropriate services and supports to meet their own needs.
Outcome 2.1: Family caregivers are recognized as essential partners in 
the care teams of the person(s) to whom they are providing support.
From our Listening Sessions
“ … Caregivers should be as much a part of the health care team  
as physicians, nurses, etc.”
Multiple respondents to the family caregiving RFI noted that when a care recipient 
designates a family caregiver, that caregiver often goes on to play a key role in 
ensuring the medical, social services, and personal needs of the individual are met. 
One respondent referred to them as the “glue” that keeps the system together. For 
that reason, it is crucial that their role be recognized in health care and educational 
settings, particularly when care and/or educational plans are being developed for the 
individuals receiving support and those plans include tasks and responsibilities to be

[page 42]
National Strategy to Support Family Caregivers Page 42
carried out by the caregiver. Too often, care plans are developed for individuals that 
require caregivers to perform certain tasks, such as medical tasks, personal care 
tasks, or transportation, without input from the caregiver.
Including family caregivers in the development of care plans and providing them access 
to information, with the approval of the person receiving support, has the potential 
to improve outcomes. An informed caregiver, particularly one trained in how best to 
support the needs and preferences of the individual, is better able to communicate 
changing needs to providers, manage medication, and assess health care options, such 
as whether to visit a hospital emergency room or an urgent care center during an acute 
incident—or to support the person for whom they care in doing so.
In the educational realm, kin and grandparent caregivers are often responsible for ensuring 
that a child completes their homework or attends health-related (including mental health) 
appointments. To recalibrate systems to facilitate caregiver success and better outcomes 
for the individuals receiving their care, the Advisory Councils identiﬁed two key approaches 
that should be undertaken in coordination with the federal government.
The priority action is to establish a consensus group made up of public and private 
health care, education, and social services leaders, family caregivers, people receiving 
care, and other related parties to develop strategies for systematically incorporating 
family caregivers into health care, social service, and academic systems. This 
should specifically include addressing barriers to caregivers being a part of “the care 
team,” such as lack of recognition of caregiver roles, access challenges (broadband, 
transportation, etc.), and health reimbursement models that effectively create 
disincentives for medical providers to collaborate and engage with a patient’s family 
caregiver. It should also consider legal barriers and issues and ensure that family 
caregivers support, but do not displace, the role of the person receiving support in 
decision making. A priority of such a group should include encouraging health care 
payers and others to create or leverage financial incentives, such as billing codes 
and approvals for who can be added to a health plan to enable payers, clinicians, 
and social services providers (including home health agencies) to partner with family 
caregivers in ways that continue to center the needs of the person receiving support, 
while also ensuring caregivers have a voice in decisions that will affect them.
A second priority action is to develop the infrastructure (and appropriate funding 
sources) necessary for researchers; national, state, regional, and local philanthropic 
organizations; health care systems; and others to measure and disseminate the 
quantitative and qualitative contributions that family caregivers make in supporting 
the health and well-being of people of all ages across a wide range of circumstances. 
A priority of such research should be more tools for culturally competent caregiver 
identification. (See Outcome 5.1 for discussion)

[page 43]
National Strategy to Support Family Caregivers Page 43
To assist with integrating caregivers in medical settings, the Ontario Caregiver 
Organization created caregiver ID badges to visually recognize family caregivers 
in health care settings. They also created a toolkit to help systems integrate the  
badges into existing health care protocols.
Finally, while two separate outcomes under Goal 1 (Outcomes 1.1 and 1.2) describe 
the need for increased family caregiver identification across populations, there are 
also specific situations within existing systems where it is necessary for professionals 
to quickly identify a caregiver for efficient delivery of services. Examples include 
when first responders arrive on the scene of an accident, during triage in emergency 
departments, or when an adult who is not the parent brings a child to school. The 
need for such tools presents an opportunity for both public and private entities to 
fund and support the research and development of a range of evidence-based tools 
and technologies for effective, proactive caregiver identification and the integration 
of caregiver information into medical and school records, when appropriate. (Also 
supports Outcome 5.3)
As such tools become available, organizations can review existing practices, 
workflows, procedures, and industry standards to integrate them into existing 
workflows. This can mean adapting intake or screening protocols, surveying patient 
or client populations to identify existing family caregivers, and adapting messaging 
to ensure that caregivers are accurately reflected in those materials. (Also supports 
Outcomes 1.1 and 1.3)
To support such broad cultural change in existing systems, a range of educational 
materials, job aids, trainings, and new workflow documentation will be needed 
across health care, education, social services, emergency, and even financial 
sectors. Professional accreditation agencies can amplify such efforts by requiring 
implementation of tools to identify and support family caregivers as part of professional 
certification and accreditation.
Aligned Actions
Federal agencies have committed to 13 specific actions within the coming years in 
support of Outcome 2.1. See “Actions for Others” for more than 50 additional actions 
that states, communities, and other stakeholders can take to support Goal 2.
Outcome 2.2: Where appropriate, identifying services and supports 
needs for caregivers consistently starts with a review of family caregiver 
strengths and preferences using evidence-based assessments.
Many family caregivers find they are faced with a new reality for which they have no 
prior experience, nor do they know what reasonable expectations are to have of health

[page 44]
National Strategy to Support Family Caregivers Page 44
care and other service providers. Accurately assessing the needs of family caregivers 
with evidence-based tools and protocols is critical to providing services that make 
a difference for the caregiver and empowers them to better meet the needs and 
preferences of the person they are supporting. In addition, the findings of assessments 
can also identify opportunities to address social determinants of health (SDOH). (See 
Outcome 3.4 for further discussion of SDOH)
From our Listening Sessions
“With assessment tools, then they have to be free or very low cost …  
we’ve had a hard time accessing certain scales and then to get them in the 
languages that we need. So sometimes they’re translated and of course,  
we would want to use the validated, translated version.”
As the RAISE Act Initial Report to Congress made clear, talking with family caregivers 
in addition to the person they are supporting enables clinicians and providers to better 
understand each person’s unique strengths, needs, preferences, and challenges. Such 
understanding can facilitate the development of a family-centered plan of care that 
addresses the needs of both members of the caregiving dyad.2 This, in turn, has the 
potential to help family caregivers provide support for as long as possible.
The federal government, states, health care systems, and community-based 
organizations should make culturally competent caregiver assessments a standard 
part of care delivery, where appropriate. That means they would be included in 
quality measures, and providers would be compensated for time spent conducting an 
assessment. The assessments should be based on reliable and evidence-informed 
approaches. The outcomes of these assessments inform the development of a flexible, 
family-centered plan of care. It is critical to note that there exists a distinction below 
the assessment process, which uses structured, validated tools for determining a 
caregiver’s strengths, ability, and needs, and person-centered planning, which is an 
inductive process that identifies issues important and unique to a given caregiver and 
weaves those findings into a support plan.
Researchers and academic institutions can support the adoption and use of caregiver 
assessments. There are several ways to do this, including by investing in efforts to 
better understand and assess specific instruments and mechanisms, translating 
instruments for cultural competency, training people to use and interpret the 
instruments, and integrating them into existing processes within health care and long-
term services and supports systems. Integrating into existing processes will be key to 
avoid “additional burden” concern from health care systems.

[page 45]
National Strategy to Support Family Caregivers Page 45
For more on person-centered planning, see:
Five Competency Domains for Staff Who Facilitate Person-Centered Planning
Person-Centered Practices Self-Assessment for Governmental Agencies that  
Oversee Human Services
Policy makers, health care systems, and providers may need to be prepared for initial 
resistance to the widespread use of caregiver assessments. Many caregivers, in 
particular, kin and grandparent caregivers, have negative previous experiences with 
assessment tools being used in non-supportive ways. It is critically important that the 
assessment process—and the language used in describing it—not be perceived as 
punitive for grandparents and other caregivers, and instead, result in meaningful actions. 
(Some kin and grandparent caregivers are concerned that assessments will be used 
in a way that would lead to the inappropriate removal of children from their homes or 
a decision not to place the children with them, rather than focusing on what supports 
could be put in place to support them caring for the children.) Advocacy groups and 
health care associations may want to develop a communications campaign to raise 
awareness of how assessments can benefit caregivers. States and communities can 
play an important role by reviewing existing state grandparent assessments and the 
procedures around them for cultural sensitivity. Ensuring a common terminology across 
populations about the role and intended purpose of caregiver assessments will further 
integrate them in the delivery of services and supports.
Once culturally competent assessments are developed and tested, health care and 
social services systems must implement evidence-based practices for caregiver 
support at all points of health care delivery. That can include broad adoption of 
assessments as well as pilot projects in a variety of settings to identify caregivers in 
need of services and supports.
After assessments ar e integrated into the care experience, the outcomes must be  
available to providers of services so that they can adapt their efforts to encompass the 
needs of the caregiver. As evidence-based and -informed assessment tools become 
more available, health care, education, and social services systems must ensure 
that staff have the skills to use them (and operationalize the results) in ways that are 
culturally competent, trauma-informed, and person- and family-centered. To facilitate 
these shifts, health care and LTSS systems should consider hiring and/or training 
dedicated staff, ideally with lived experience, to increase caregiver engagement.
Caregiver assessments can do more than just identify the needs of the family caregiver.  
When aggregated and analyzed across all domains, the data from family caregiver 
assessments can be valuable tools for administrators and policymakers to develop

[page 46]
National Strategy to Support Family Caregivers Page 46
new programs and services or form new partnerships for service delivery based on 
what family caregivers say they need, resulting in a more efficient and effective system 
of supports. (Also supports Outcome 5.3)
Aligned Actions
Federal agencies have committed to 9 specific actions within the coming years in 
support of Outcome 2.2. See “Actions for Others” for more than 50 additional actions 
that states, communities, and other stakeholders can take to support Goal 2.
Outcome 2.3: Where appropriate, family caregivers are included and 
considered in the development of care recipients’ plans of care across a 
range of settings and circumstances.
From our Listening Sessions
“I understand people deﬁnitely can’t go back to medical school,  
but starting early, starting in the school system, starting in the medical  
schools, in the curriculum, making sure that caregiver knowledge  
and understanding is taught from the beginning.”
Family caregivers often are the de facto coordinators who help navigate systems 
of providers, services, and other supports. They make appointments, provide 
transportation, take notes, fill prescriptions, use electronic health records and patient 
portals, and carry out care plans. Yet, they are often excluded from routine health care 
encounters. Notably, they may not even be included in care transitions processes 
as patients move across settings such as hospitals, skilled nursing/rehabilitation 
facilities, and other types of long-term care settings. Involving family caregivers in care 
transitions and discharge planning activities to improve care coordination is the most 
basic level of engagement that family caregivers should expect.
It is important to note, however, that inherent in any discussion about providing access 
to health care information are legal implications relating to preserving the autonomy 
and self-determination of the person receiving support. Not all people who provide 
support are designated or equipped to make decisions on behalf of another person, 
nor should they have unfettered access to information such as health records and 
patient portals. All decisions about access to information should be made by the 
person receiving support.
The Sonoran Center for Excellence in Disabilities, funded by ACL, offers a 
20-question caregiver assessment tool for caregivers of individuals with I/DD. The 
tool is specifically designed to support person-centered planning.

[page 47]
National Strategy to Support Family Caregivers Page 47
United Hospital Fund developed a toolkit for the implementation of New York’s  
CARE Act. It contains a guide for a hospital discharge process that includes the 
family caregiver in a way that is designed to ensure the best outcomes for the 
patient while also respecting the preferences of the caregiver.
Improvements to care coordination can be achieved by ensuring that, when 
appropriate and supported by the care recipient, caregivers have a voice in all 
transition planning, regardless of the setting. Forty-four states have adopted the 
Caregiver Advise, Record, and Enable (CARE) Act, which seeks to address this 
challenge by requiring hospitals to do the following:
Record the name of the family caregiver on the medical record,
Inform the car egiver when the person they support is to be discharged, and
Pr
ovide the family caregiver with education and instruction about the medical  
tasks they ar
e expected to perform.
These requirements ar e the first step to ensuring car
egivers can be a part of care 
transitions. Where possible and appropriate, states may want to explore options for 
incentivizing CARE Act implementation or allowing for enforcement of its provisions. 
States have an opportunity to explore options for more consistent and robust 
implementation of all provisions of the CARE Act, up to and including provisions for 
enforcement and monitoring by relevant regulatory agencies.
In addition to these considerations, health care and social service systems should 
routinely scan their policies and practices for unnecessary or outdated policies to 
make sure the needs of caregivers are reflected in those policies. Ideally, a caregiver 
should be identified prior to discharge and the results of the family caregiver 
assessment should be integrated into the discharge planning instructions, including 
referrals to supportive services, if appropriate. (Also supports Outcome 2.2) State and 
community agencies can support this effort by partnering with health care systems 
to develop and offer caregiver support services that address the specific challenges 
associated with hospital discharge and similar transitions.
Supported decision making (SDM) is one alternative to guardianship that 
ensures people with disabilities retain their decision-making capacity. With SDM, 
individuals retain their right to make decisions for themselves with the support of 
trusted friends and/or family members they choose. For more information, visit 
ACL’s Supported Decision Making Program webpage.
Lessons learned from integrating family caregivers into settings transitions have the 
potential to benefit family caregivers in other settings. (Also supports Outcome 5.3)

[page 48]
National Strategy to Support Family Caregivers Page 48
There are multiple health care-centric care-coordination models proven to support 
people and their caregivers during transitions. For example, research has shown that 
coordinating care transitions is especially important for family caregivers of someone 
with dementia, especially where a change of location can result in more demands 
on the caregiver due to agitation, disorientation, or decompensating of the person 
receiving support. Other sectors can look to such models to translate caregiver-
focused transitional programs to other settings, such as supportive services to people 
with long-term care needs and their family caregivers.
Aligned Actions
Federal agencies have committed to 9 specific actions within the coming years in 
support of Outcome 2.3. See “Actions for Others” for more than 50 additional actions 
that states, communities, and other stakeholders can take to support Goal 2.
Outcome 2.4 When policies are proposed or revised, the potential 
impact on family caregivers is anticipated and understood.
From our Listening Sessions
“It’s very hard for providers of social supports to collaborate with health 
systems… They live on different metrics than we do, and they don’t understand 
what we’re talking about… And it I think it requires some real training and more 
sort of collaboration among the community-based organizations to have the 
market power to be able to work with the health systems.”
Change in health care, social services, educational, and other systems is 
inevitable. When such changes occur, the opportunity presents itself to ensure the 
responsiveness of the system remains the same or is improved for the people it 
touches. The Advisory Councils found that the best way to achieve this is through 
engagement with individuals and their caregivers early and often in the processes 
driving change. Going forward, more attention should be paid to ensuring a thorough
understanding of the downstream implications and results of changes to systems, 
policies, and/or practice to persons needing care and their family caregivers. This 
is the essence of person and family-centered care that is expanded upon in First 
Principles: Cross-Cutting Considerations for Family Caregiver Support.
 
As noted above, a key to achieving this is through representation of family caregivers 
on decision-making boards and committees that shape both policy and practice. Only 
through their engagement can systems ensure the lived experience and perspectives 
of caregivers are considered and included.
The federal government; universities; national, state, regional, and local philanthropic 
organizations; health care systems; school districts; and others can fund and/or

[page 49]
National Strategy to Support Family Caregivers Page 49
disseminate research findings to increase understanding of how proposed policy 
changes can affect caregivers. As part of this effort, researchers should identify best 
practices for including caregivers in systems change. In addition, customer-serving 
organizations should adopt practices that help identify all potential stakeholders 
(including caregivers) at the initiation of proposed projects. State leaders may wish 
to explore means by which their state could champion involving caregivers in policy 
change. Certification, licensing, and/or accreditation bodies can help by requiring the 
full recognition of family caregivers as key to effective policymaking. In this regard, 
licensing and accreditation bodies can become leaders in ensuring the opportunity for 
participation and engagement of family caregivers across multiple settings and service 
delivery systems.
Aligned Actions
Federal agencies have committed to 6 specific actions within the coming years in 
support of Outcome 2.4. See “Actions for Others” for more than 50 additional actions 
that states, communities, and other stakeholders can take to support Goal 2.
Outcome 2.5: The education curricula of professionals who will 
potentially work with family caregivers include speciﬁc topics and 
coursework designed to ensure they have the skills to do so effectively.
Strengthening professional awareness and understanding of the needs of family 
caregivers is especially critical for any field that might engage with them, including 
(but not limited to) geriatrics, social work, public health, child development, palliative 
care, mental health, substance use, criminal justice, education, and pediatrics. When 
professionals who interact with caregivers have no training on how best to interact 
and engage with them, the ability to provide culturally and linguistically appropriate, 
person and family-centered care is inhibited. Training for these professionals 
should use the broadest possible definition of “family caregiver” to include kin and 
grandparent caregivers, caregiving youth, LGB caregivers, disabled caregivers, and 
caregivers in nontraditional family structures. A core competency in those trainings 
must be caregiver participation, where appropriate and desired, in the delivery of 
health care services. Trainings should be built upon available and emerging data and 
research on family caregiving (See Goal 5) and include understanding the role of family 
caregiver assessment and the availability of the appropriate tools and resources for 
facilitating referrals, assistance with navigating complex service delivery systems, and 
understanding the options for support that are available. The trainings should also 
feature family caregivers themselves as speakers/presenters to ensure that students 
can develop understanding and empathy for the lived experience of caregivers.
States and accrediting organizations can support these efforts by requiring 
professionals to receive training on family caregiving as a prerequisite to certification

[page 50]
National Strategy to Support Family Caregivers Page 50
and including questions about family caregiving on licensure exams. Developers 
of continuing professional education curricula should create and disseminate 
training resources about engaging with family caregivers that use inclusive 
language and reflect the complexity of today’s family caregiving landscape. (Also 
supports Outcomes 1.1 and 1.3) Health care organizations and other providers 
can create opportunities for professionals to gain knowledge of family caregivers’ 
lived experiences to understand their emotional journey, and to expand their use 
of compassion, empathy, and validation when interacting with caregivers. Health 
care, long-term services and supports, and school systems, in turn, should ensure 
their respective workforces are educated about the experiences and needs of all 
kinds of caregivers by incorporating this content in culturally competent ways into 
onboarding, experiential learning programs, continuing education courses, and other 
professional development opportunities.
Respondents to the RFI noted that education of those professionals who engage with 
kinship families and grandfamilies would be especially beneficial (e.g., pediatricians, 
child welfare workers, mental health professionals, child care workers, and educators). 
Typically, when a child participates in educational, health care, and other supportive 
programs, their parent(s) are expected to represent that child to the various systems. 
As a result, when providers encounter kin and grandparent caregivers, they have few 
established practices on how to engage those caregivers to incorporate them in the 
provider’s care delivery. Formal education on the unique strengths and challenges 
faced by kin and grandparent caregivers will facilitate the ability of professionals to 
develop culturally competent and strengths-based care and support plans for the 
children in kin and grandparent-led families.
Aligned Actions
Federal agencies have committed to 18 specific actions within the coming years in 
support of Outcome 2.5. See “Actions for Others” for more than 50 additional actions 
that states, communities, and other stakeholders can take to support Goal 2.
Indicators of Success: Partnership and Engagement
As the actions under Goal 2 are implemented, family caregivers will experience greater 
participation on care teams and in organizational processes, as the following social 
changes become increasingly widespread:
Health care providers proactively identify if an individual presenting at a medical 
facility has a family car
egiver and includes them in the care process.
Caregiver assessments in medical settings are as commonplace as 
documenting height, weight, and blood pressure.

[page 51]
National Strategy to Support Family Caregivers Page 51
Medical records include sections devoted to documenting the names, support, 
abilities, and preferences of caregivers.
Professional messaging throughout health care, child welfare, education, and 
social services systems is inclusive of caregivers.
Medical and parapr ofessionals ar
e trained on culturally competent and 
linguistically appropriate ways of engaging caregivers.
When grandparent or other kin attend a school event or confer
ence, educators 
quickly recognize if that person is a primary caregiver or a guest and ar e
 
prepared to engage with them.
Family caregivers have a better understanding of the care planning process and 
are better informed and prepared to assist the individual in need of their car
e.
Family caregivers have access to training and support for self-advocacy when 
interacting with professionals involved in the life of the individual for whom they 
are caring.
Educational terminology such as “par
ent-teacher conferences” are inclusive of 
non- parent caregivers.
Care plans ar
e no longer developed with the assumption that family caregivers 
will perform certain tasks or take on certain roles. Instead, caregivers participate  
in the pr
ocess and—depending on their needs—receive referrals to services and 
supports that help them carry out their part of the plan.
Systems are held accountable for disparities in access to paid services and 
supports.
When a caregiver needs assistance, support, or training, professionals have the 
knowledge and resources to make r eferrals. This integrated network of support
 
includes medical, legal, social services, and educational professionals.

[page 52]
National Strategy to Support Family Caregivers Page 52
Goal 3: Strengthen services and supports for family 
caregivers
As previously noted, family caregivers are a major provider of long-term services and 
supports for older adults, disabled people of all ages, and children whose parents 
cannot care for them. While some aspects of family caregiving come naturally, many 
of the tasks associated with today’s family caregiving require a level of competency 
that people can master only through experience and training. Just as family caregivers 
provide support to others, they themselves often need support to allow them to 
continue in their roles.
To enable caregivers to provide support, now and into the future, the nation will need 
significant investments to ensure consistent access to an array of flexible services 
and supports, tailored to their needs and preferences, including high quality training 
about a wide range of topics; understandable instructions and communications about 
their responsibilities; flexible respite care, counseling, and peer support; and other 
accessible, culturally competent goods, services, and supports. These programs must 
be trauma-informed and culturally and linguistically appropriate to the populations 
they serve. Such investments will require action far beyond the present scope of the 
Advisory Councils and current federal programs.
In fact, the Advisory Councils heard repeated calls “loud and clear” from multiple 
stakeholders across the country and from some members of the Advisory Councils 
themselves for statutory and legislative changes to address the long-term care 
system in this country. Specifically, stakeholders have called for increased support 
for home and community-based services in Medicaid (generally and, more recently, 
for programs like Money Follows the Person) and by adding a long-term services 
and supports benefit in the Medicare program for respite, adult day services, and 
home modifications; and increasing funding and flexibilities for programs such as 
ACL’s National Family Caregiver Support Program, Lifespan Respite Program, and 
Alzheimer’s Disease Programs Initiative (which provides community-based support for 
people with ADRD and their family caregivers, as well as programs for professional 
caregivers who support people with ADRD), and the VA’s Caregiver Support Program. 
The Advisory Councils believe such statutory changes will be increasingly necessary 
as the experience of family caregiving becomes more widely recognized and 
acknowledged as a function that every American will either provide or need. (Also 
supports Outcomes 1.1, 1.2, 2.1, and 5.1)
The Advisory Councils developed ten shared outcomes specifically designed to 
strengthen the availability of a range of services and supports. Over time, and in 
coordination with the achievement of other Strategy goals, they will prepare the nation 
for expanding assistance to and support of family caregivers.

[page 53]
National Strategy to Support Family Caregivers Page 53
Outcome 3.1: Person- and family-centered, trauma-informed, and 
culturally appropriate caregiver services and supports are accessible for 
all family caregivers.
From our Listening Sessions
“ … [For] family caregivers, one of the biggest [needs] is just expanded  
services, more funding for more programming.”
A priority action identified by the Advisory Councils to prepare service providers for 
future expansions of services in response to rising demand is to invest more resources 
into overcoming barriers to access to services. Foremost of these are language and 
cultural barriers, suggesting providing translated or culturally adapted resources, 
services, and information to family caregiving communities that typically do not receive 
caregiving services should be a fundamental priority. (Also supports Outcome 5.3) 
For example, states, philanthropic organizations, community-based organizations, 
and faith-based organizations can review eligibility criteria for programs that use 
narrow definitions of “family” to explore ways to broaden those definitions to include 
caregivers who have other relationships with their care recipient, such as relatives 
beyond parents, grandparents, children, and spouses, as well as domestic partners, 
siblings, and/or other community members. Additionally, these sectors can evaluate 
existing resources to ensure they are culturally competent for their intended audiences.
The California Caregiver Resource Centers provide a model for a single point of 
entry for training and support and access to services for family caregivers.
Kin and grandparent caregivers need af
fordable legal and financial information,
 
along with services from providers trained in trauma-informed care for children, and 
topics not typically associated with family caregiving, such as behavioral supports 
for children. They also need practical assistance with navigating school enrollment, 
pediatric care, and emergency planning. To address this, community-based 
organizations, faith-based organizations, and the organizations that fund them may 
want to prioritize the development and delivery of services for the populations of kin 
and grandparent caregivers in their communities.
Rural Populations
Caregivers in rural areas often lack access to needed services and supports. States 
can address this challenge by establishing task forces to identify and address 
barriers in hard-to-reach communities. Once barriers to access are documented 
and understood, states may want to consider expanding access to HCBS through 
expansions to Medicaid or other state-funded programs serving low-income

[page 54]
National Strategy to Support Family Caregivers Page 54
populations. In parallel to these efforts, states, insurance payers, and health care 
systems can collaborate to ensure the financial viability of community-based 
organizations and faith-based organizations serving populations that have not in the 
past received caregiver support services. (See Outcome 3.4 for information on other 
services that have the potential to improve health and well-being in these communities)
Washington State’s Medicaid Transformation Project is using a Section 1115 
waiver to create and continue to develop projects, activities, and services that 
improve Washington’s health care system, including two caregiver support 
programs. The services within these cost-effective programs have improved the 
outcomes for caregivers and the people they support.
A common theme in the stakeholder input received by the Advisory Councils was the 
value of ambassador programs. Such programs can help build trust between local 
groups and providers of services. (Also supports Outcome 1.3)
To achieve further alignment, states, in partnership with a range of stakeholders, can 
create mechanisms for collaboration across organizations, such as communities of 
practice, to foster a cross-agency, interdisciplinary approach to supporting family 
caregivers. National, state, regional, tribal, and local philanthropic organizations and 
research institutions can expand the availability of culturally competent and adaptable 
evidence-based protocols by continuing to invest in translating and adapting existing 
evidence-based protocols and developing new ones. (Also supports Outcome 5.3)
Aligned Actions
Federal agencies have committed to 32 specific actions within the coming years in 
support of Outcome 3.1. See “Actions for Others” for more than 50 additional actions 
that states, communities, and other stakeholders can take to support Goal 3.
Outcome 3.2: Family caregivers can obtain respite services that meet 
their unique needs.
From our Listening Sessions
“ … I think even we’re still struggling when just developing the  
awareness of respite care services and making sure that not only providers,  
but caregivers are aware of it.”
High-quality respite is one of the most requested needs of caregivers, but gaps in the 
availability and affordability of access are significant. For family caregivers, respite 
can mean different things and be received in numerous ways. Input from the Advisory 
Council members and stakeholder listening sessions all agreed on one fundamental

[page 55]
National Strategy to Support Family Caregivers Page 55
fact about respite: it must be meaningful to the person receiving it. For example, some 
family caregivers might find a short time away from the actual caregiving situation to be 
what is needed most. Others might desire a break from other duties like homemaking, 
or from other tasks needed by the individuals for whom they are providing care.
Additionally, the concept of “respite” or a short break from family caregiving 
responsibilities might not be understood or valued in the same way across all cultures. 
Understanding these complexities is critical to developing respite services that are 
acceptable to different cultural and ethnic groups and fit a broad array of respite 
needs. For example, when developing respite programs and services for grandparent 
and kinship caregivers, it may be necessary to take a broader view of the types of 
activities that equate to respite. Additionally, where permissible under current statutory 
and regulatory guidelines, after-school clubs, youth sports, and camps could be 
marketed as respite programs if they are available in areas where kin and grandparent 
caregivers reside. Similarly, respite programs that meet the unique needs of caregiving 
youth, caregivers supporting people with complex medical needs, and those with I/DD 
must become more widespread and easier to access.
The VA’s Building Better Caregivers offers a series of self-paced workshops that 
include access to an online “alumnus” community for peer-to-peer support to 
reinforce formal learnings.
States, insurance payers, community-based organizations, faith-based organizations, 
health care systems, managed care plans, and employers can collaborate to create 
greater awareness of the need for respite, in all its forms. They should develop respite 
opportunities that serve caregivers who would benefit most from this service and 
reflect the respite needs identified in the caregiving assessments mentioned earlier in 
the Strategy. Materials and messaging describing these programs and services should 
be developed in ways that resonate with the target populations and that align with their 
values and beliefs. Once services are developed, caregivers must be able to easily find 
the information they need when they need it. Information about respite services should 
be disseminated to caregivers through trusted repositories and programs, such as the 
Respite Locator and in the caregiving portal. (See Outcome 1.1)
State and local government agencies, insurance payers, managed care plans, 
community-based organizations and faith-based organizations, and other providers 
can consider expanding or prioritizing funding for payment that supports respite 
services, including training respite volunteers and ensuring direct care workers 
(DCWs) are trained and available to provide high-quality and flexible respite care. At 
present there are significant shortfalls in the number of DCWs available to provide 
respite care. Health care plans can prioritize respite care under the supplemental

[page 56]
National Strategy to Support Family Caregivers Page 56
services they provide and advocate for use of those services by family caregivers. In 
addition, community-based organizations can explore establishing adult day services 
as a respite care option and promoting social respite models, like faith-based drop-
in programs, which are more affordable and flexible than traditional adult day care 
or adult day health care. Researchers can also evaluate barriers, such as operating 
hours, compliance with accessibility requirements under multiple federal disability civil 
rights laws, and legacy licensing requirements to look for ways to expand the number 
of community settings where respite can be provided. (Also supports Outcome 5.3)
Take Another Break SC! offers a case study on how South Carolina optimized the 
delivery of federally-funded lifespan respite services across the state.
The 2019 Generations United report, 
A Place to Call Home, includes case 
study descriptions of car egiver-friendly housing models, such as Plaza West, an 
intergenerational housing model in Washington, D.C. Plaza West has 50 units 
designated for kin and grandparent caregiver-led households. Residents have 
access to on-site programs and referrals related to job training and employment, 
parenting, academic support, food assistance, furniture, clothing, recreation, 
physical and mental wellness, and legal aid.
Aligned Actions
Federal agencies have committed to 11 specific actions within the coming years in 
support of Outcome 3.2. See “Actions for Others” for more than 50 additional actions 
that states, communities, and other stakeholders can take to support Goal 3.
Outcome 3.3: A range of evidence-based education, counseling, and 
peer support services are available to family caregivers.
Numerous studies have shown that caregivers can experience elevated levels of stress 
and social isolation. Just as training helps caregivers feel more confident in their tasks, 
counseling and peer support from people who can empathize with their situation has 
been shown to improve outcomes for caregivers as well.
At present, education, counseling, and peer support designed specifically for unpaid 
caregivers are often difficult to find and access. For example, grandparents and other 
kin caring for children often are not offered access to the training and supports given 
to unrelated foster parents. One of the reasons for these gaps in access to trainings 
is because educational needs and preferences can differ significantly by population. 
Curriculum designers can explore opportunities to develop “bite-sized” trainings that 
allow a family caregiver to learn a specific skill rather than having to commit to a full 
curriculum. The Advisory Councils also noted that training programs that are flexible,

[page 57]
National Strategy to Support Family Caregivers Page 57
available in-person or remote, feature the lived experience of other caregivers, and 
offer a choice of formats and languages, should be prioritized for development. These 
training modules should ideally be made available on the family caregiving website 
described under Outcome 1.1 so that all caregivers and professionals who interact 
with caregivers have access to them. (Also supports Outcome 3.6)
These trainings should also be culturally competent to the populations they serve. 
For example, educational materials for kin and grandparent caregivers should use 
terminology specific to their needs rather than expecting viewers to translate. States, 
insurance payers, community-based organizations, faith-based organizations, and 
health care systems are encouraged to look to models that combine education with 
counseling and/or peer support when designing and commissioning programs. Where 
needed, trainings also should be trauma informed.
Aligned Actions
Federal agencies have committed to 12 specific actions within the coming years in 
support of Outcome 3.3. See “Actions for Others” for more than 50 additional actions 
that states, communities, and other stakeholders can take to support Goal 3.
Outcome 3.4: Family caregivers and families have safe places to live, 
nutritious food, and adequate transportation.
From our Listening Sessions
“I’ve grown tired of trying to reach out because they always want 
me to come to them! I live in a campground in a very rural area! 
I can[’t] make it anywhere!!! I’m stuck in bad situation that  
brings me down more every day I wake up!”
All people should have access to adequate and safe housing, proper nutrition, and 
access to medical appointments and other transportation-related necessities. Without 
access to these fundamental requirements of daily living, family caregivers will face 
daily struggles. As a public health issue, effective family caregiver support efforts must 
include a focus on the five domains of the social determinants of health:
Economic stability and security (including freedom from workplace discrimination)
Education access and quality
Health care access and quality
Neighborhood and built environment
Social and community context

[page 58]
National Strategy to Support Family Caregivers Page 58
To increase the effectiveness of high-quality, setting-appropriate, caregiver-
defined services, numerous stakeholders can explore innovative ways to implement 
programs that support safe, accessible, and intergenerational housing, nutrition, 
transportation, elder wellness, and quality of life. For example, Asset-Based 
Community Development is a growing movement that assesses the resources, skills, 
and experience available in a local community and uses them as the foundation of 
sustainable community development.
Addressing the social determinants of health within the broader scheme of family 
caregiving is key to addressing longstanding health inequities among caregivers and 
their families in a holistic way. Policymakers can review the recommendations in Family 
Caregiver Needs Requiring Legislative and Other Policy Changes, which includes a list 
of specific legislative changes, aligned with the Strategy, that have the most potential 
to benefit caregivers.
To support this vision, states; insurance payers/health plans; community-based 
organizations; faith-based organizations; health care systems; and national, state, 
regional, and local philanthropic organizations can explore ways to increase the 
availability of wraparound services locally. For example, low-interest loans and 
startup grants within communities could encourage the development of programs like 
culturally competent adult day services. Service coordinators in low-income and public 
housing can be trained to understand and recognize the needs of family caregivers 
living in those communities. Communities of faith can explore opportunities to develop 
new ministries around key social determinants issues. State and local philanthropies 
can identify opportunities to fund specific initiatives designed to address these issues 
as well. (Also supports Outcomes 3.2 and 3.3)
Aligned Actions
Federal agencies have committed to 10 specific actions within the coming years in 
support of Outcome 3.4. See “Actions for Others” for more than 50 additional actions 
that states, communities, and other stakeholders can take to support Goal 3.
Outcome 3.5: Family caregivers have innovative tools and technology to 
assist them in their roles.
From our Listening Sessions
“Develop software that functions just like Uber in tracking and vetting …  
the direct care service worker. Clients can rate the caregiver  
providing a greater level of accountability and performance. This also  
eliminates the need for care agencies as the direct care worker can  
be paid directly through the app as Uber drivers are.”

[page 59]
National Strategy to Support Family Caregivers Page 59
The pandemic highlighted the potential of technology to assist both caregivers and 
people receiving support. The flexibilities around telehealth, online training, counseling, 
and support groups that took place during the public health emergency provided 
opportunities to explore how technology can make family caregiving easier. States, 
health care systems, and insurance payers can leverage the lessons learned from the 
pandemic to make some of these changes permanent as part of their other efforts to 
support caregivers. They also can take steps to ensure that caregivers receive training 
that enables them to use these technologies successfully.
Those flexibilities only work, however, if caregivers have access to reliable, high-
speed internet access, along with equipment and training to use it. The Federal 
Communications Commission’s task force to improve health outcomes by providing 
land-based internet access to all communities is an important step in increasing 
caregivers’ access to technological tools. In addition, the Affordable Connectivity 
Program (ACP)
 
 provides eligible households with a discount on broadband service 
and connected devices. States and local governments can support federal efforts to 
expand broadband infrastructure in their communities by supporting the reporting 
of performance metrics. Communities can establish a local task force to uncover 
caregivers’ unmet technological needs as part of state planning. Internet providers 
and developers of infrastructure should prioritize supporting family caregivers in rural 
and hard-to-reach communities and expand access to technologies to support them. 
The recognition of supporting family caregivers and its importance is derived from a 
caregiver-aware business culture. (Also supports Outcome 1.1)
Community-based organizations, faith-based organizations, health care systems, 
insurance payers, and the IT industry can also actively seek out ways to embrace, 
promote, and fund caregiver access to future-focused tools and assistive technology, 
such as smart homes, wearable blood pressure and heart monitoring devices, 
automated pill dispensers, e-learning modules, task management apps, speech 
amplification and adaptation systems, and geo-tracking. National, state, regional, and 
local philanthropic organizations and research institutions can support these efforts 
by increasing research into evidence-based assistive technology models that benefit 
caregivers now and as new technologies emerge. (Also supports Outcome 5.3)
Aligned Actions
Federal agencies have committed to 9 specific actions within the coming years in 
support of Outcome 3.5. See “Actions for Others” for more than 50 additional actions 
that states, communities, and other stakeholders can take to support Goal 3.
Outcome 3.6: Volunteers of all ages and abilities are trained, vetted, and 
ready to assist family caregivers.

[page 60]
National Strategy to Support Family Caregivers Page 60
From our Listening Sessions
“Is it possible to create a national support hotline, perhaps staffed  
by volunteers who have been in a caring situation and/or experienced  
social workers who have an interest in kinship caregiving?”
Many family caregivers have great need for support, which is often unrecognized, 
unaffordable, and/or unavailable. Volunteers have long been a mainstay of the 
systems that provide respite, meal delivery, transportation, and social interaction, 
and are relatively cost-effective for both programs and families. Expanding volunteer 
opportunities can both increase the availability of direct supports for family caregivers 
and create a path for expanding the direct care workforce. State agencies, 
community-based organizations, and faith-based organizations can explore ways to 
support the coordination and training of volunteers. Community organizations can also 
develop and disseminate outreach materials to educate the public and professionals 
about volunteerism, mentoring, and peer-to-peer support programs as both a way of 
assisting family caregivers and as a means of developing valuable experience that can 
be applied professionally. To further support this, accrediting bodies and academic 
institutions can consider expanding programs that provide experiential credit for 
volunteer activities, offer intergenerational volunteer opportunities, or provide tuition 
credit or leverage community service hour requirements in educational institutions.
Community Care Corps is a national program that fosters innovative models in 
which local volunteers assist with non-medical tasks, provide companionship, and 
relieve overburdened family caregivers. The program benefits family caregivers, 
older adults, and persons with disabilities.
Aligned Actions
Federal agencies have committed to 2 specific actions within the coming years in 
support of Outcome 3.6. See “Actions for Others” for more than 50 additional actions 
that states, communities, and other stakeholders can take to support Goal 3.
Outcome 3.7: Family caregivers’ and care recipients’ needs are a key 
consideration in emergency response efforts.
From our Listening Sessions
“Make sure police emergency call responders are trained enough to  
recognize dementia-related emergencies.”
Family caregivers, along with the people they support, are at greater risk during 
emergencies such as weather events, pandemics, natural and human-caused

[page 61]
National Strategy to Support Family Caregivers Page 61
disasters, and economic instability.  Yet, currently few formal systems for integrating 
the needs of caregivers and care recipients into emergency preparedness exist.
The HHS Office of the Assistant Secretary for Preparedness and Response 
(ASPR) offers a free web-based training to improve public health and emergency 
medical responders’ capability to address the access and functional needs of 
community-dwelling older adults in disasters.
This course provides information, resources, tools, and strategies to help assess 
and address the needs of older adults in common disaster situations, including 
natural disasters and infectious disease outbreaks. 
States, communities, community-based organizations, faith-based organizations, 
and employers can work to address this issue by including the perspectives of family 
caregivers in emergency exercise and shelter-in-place planning. Family caregivers’ 
support during a crisis should include linkages to community-based resources, 
culturally competent communications, advance care planning, medication support, 
help with care coordination, access to necessary Durable Medical Equipment (DME) 
and Assistive Technology (AT), and financial assistance. (Also supports Outcomes 
1.3, 3.1, and 4.1) It also means embedding family caregiver identification tools into 
protocols used by all emergency responders. (Also supports Outcome 2.1)
Proactively building systems to support caregivers during times of crisis, in 
combination with advance planning on the part of caregivers, may help lessen 
the impact of emergencies on family caregivers and the people they support. 
Municipalities, public health departments, homeowners’ associations, co-op boards, 
and faith-based organizations can do this by identifying caregivers in the community 
who may need additional help during emergencies and providing advance care 
planning workshops to them. One way to identify family caregivers is through a 
community census to identify and document the practical needs of local family 
caregiving populations. During an emergency, these needs can include powers 
of attorney (or other legal arrangements), access to durable medical equipment, 
assistive technology, refrigeration, and generators; mobility assistance; transportation; 
financial support; food; accessible emergency shelters; and information on emergency 
procedures that is understandable, culturally competent, and accessible to people with 
disabilities. The information gathered in a community census could also be used to 
inform and adapt local caregiver outreach efforts described in Goal 1.
To further support caregivers in emergencies, health care professionals and first 
responders should receive training in caregiver identification with an emphasis 
on emergency situations both in the community and in clinical settings. (Also 
supports Outcome 2.1) States, communities, and national, state, regional, and local

[page 62]
National Strategy to Support Family Caregivers Page 62
philanthropic organizations can specifically fund services that support unanticipated 
caregiver needs during emergencies. (Also supports Outcome 3.1)
Aligned Actions
Federal agencies have committed to 10 specific actions within the coming years in 
support of Outcome 3.7. See “Actions for Others” for more than 50 additional actions 
that states, communities, and other stakeholders can take to support Goal 3.
Outcome 3.8: Family caregivers have the skills and tools necessary to 
prepare for the future needs of the person they support.
From our Listening Sessions
“What happens to my grandchildren if something happens to me?”
Planning for when they will no longer be able to support their loved one is something 
many caregivers find difficult. “Future care planning” activities are important, however, 
because they proactively ensure prudent resource management and sound decision 
making in the event of a crisis. Advance planning in general also ensures that 
family caregivers have the skills, resources, and legal authority they need as their 
responsibilities evolve. (Also supports Outcome 3.7) States, communities, health 
care systems, insurance payers, community-based organizations, and faith-based 
organizations can proactively develop and disseminate tools and resources that can 
make this difficult task easier. These tools must be trauma-informed and adaptable 
to the cultural and demographic needs of the target population. Employers can 
support these efforts by incorporating future planning in employee benefits options. 
Professional and HR associations may want to include the topic of future planning in 
caregiving-related outreach and education tools they develop.
To raise awareness of the importance of future care planning, community-based 
organizations, faith-based organizations, libraries, and social services providers can 
make available to the public financial planning tools for family caregivers developed by 
the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau. (Also supports Outcome 4.1)
Aligned Actions
Federal agencies have committed to 3 specific actions within the coming years in 
support of Outcome 3.8. See “Actions for Others” for more than 50 additional actions 
that states, communities, and other stakeholders can take to support Goal 3.
Outcome 3.9: An agile, ﬂexible, and well-trained direct care workforce is 
available to partner with and support family caregivers.

[page 63]
National Strategy to Support Family Caregivers Page 63
The ability of family caregivers to support older adults, people with disabilities, 
and children who cannot remain with their parents is often directly affected by the 
availability of services and supports provided by direct care workers (DCWs). This 
workforce includes personal care attendants, home health aides, direct support 
professionals, residential workers, and others. These essential workers are an 
important source of respite care for family caregivers, as well as formal supports 
that complement care provided by family caregivers. Multiple respondents to the 
RFI noted that because it is difficult to find, hire, and retain DCWs, many family 
caregivers experience significant periods of time without a break from family 
caregiving responsibilities.
This is a long-standing and widespread issue that was significantly worsened by the 
pandemic, as discussed in the RAISE Advisory Council’s initial report to Congress. 
Demand for DCW services currently exceeds the number of available workers. DCWs 
are one of the highest in-demand employment categories of professionals in the U.S. 
The critically needed expansion of this workforce will not happen without significant 
changes in how they are recruited, trained, paid, and supported.
In 2021, the Center for Health Care Strategies released Strengthening the Direct 
Care Workforce: Scan of State Strategies . The scan provides examples of state 
strategies aimed at strengthening the direct care workforce. Key resources 
include examples of legislative language supporting DCWs and direct care 
workforce training models, including, in some cases, information on how states 
fund training.
A recurring theme of stakeholder input was that the DCW workforce is critical to 
the success of family caregivers. The Advisory Councils call for the convening of 
an interagency task force to work on a direct care workforce development plan, 
collaborating with states, possibly incorporating other issues that impact the workforce 
such as immigration reform, and student federal loan forgiveness programs. States, 
state agencies, and managed care plans may want to consider exploring ways to 
support these efforts by increasing wages and benefits and ensuring those increases 
are received by DCWs themselves. Ideally, this should happen in tandem with federal 
increases in wages. (See Family Caregiver Needs Requiring Legislative and Other 
Policy Changes)
Stakeholders also recommended that multiple sectors—communities, health care 
systems, payers, child welfare systems, community-based organizations, and faith- 
based organizations—collaborate to build a robust labor force of DCWs and support 
alignment with the Strategy through:

[page 64]
National Strategy to Support Family Caregivers Page 64
Creating consistent training requirements across states, via competency-based 
training with a shared set of principles for all direct care workers, including 
training on how to engage with family caregivers. (Also supports Outcome 2.5)
Incorporating into existing training supplemental modules that enable 
specialization and career advancement opportunities (e.g., dementia care). (Also 
supports Outcome 2.5)
Increasing the availability of pr
ograms that pay family caregivers for providing 
direct care services. (Also supports Outcome 4.1)
Launching outreach campaigns that promote the social and economic value of 
dir
ect care work. (Also supports Outcome 1.1)
Convening interagency task forces to standardize job titles and r esponsibilities
 
within and across states and sectors to enable better understanding of workers 
and enhance job portability. (Also supports Outcome 5.1)
To help drive the success of these activities, national, state, r egional, and local
 
philanthropic organizations and research institutions are encouraged to fund research 
and demonstration projects to advance understanding of the field and explore effective 
mechanisms for improving the direct care workforce. These should include increasing rates 
and payment structures to recruit and retain qualiﬁed DCW. (Also supports Outcome 5.2)
For further information on why it is critical that the nation support and sustain a well-
trained and adequately compensated direct care workforce, see:
First Principles: Cross-Cutting Considerations for Family Caregiver Support  
(a component of the Strategy), which discusses the dir
ect care workforce, in 
addition to the impact of trauma, and person-centered planning.
Community Supports in Crisis: No Staff, No Services explores how progress 
toward community living that has been made in services for people with I/DD 
over decades is now in jeopardy.
State Strategies for Sector Growth and Retention of the Direct Car
e Health 
Workforce provides a series of multi-sector state and employer strategies to 
addr
ess recruitment and health sector retention of direct care workers while 
balancing workforce needs, job quality, and wages.
Growing a Strong Direct Care Workforce: A Recruitment and Retention Guide 
for Employers (PHI) provides a range of strategies to help providers recruit and 
retain dir
ect care workers and improve the delivery of care.

[page 65]
National Strategy to Support Family Caregivers Page 65
8 Essential Publications on the Direct Care Workforce (PHI) provides links to
eight essential publications on the direct care worker crisis from PHI.
Aligned Actions
Federal agencies have committed to 11 specific actions within the coming years in 
support of Outcome 3.9. See “Actions for Others” for more than 50 additional actions 
that states, communities, and other stakeholders can take to support Goal 3.
Outcome 3.10: Kinship families and grandfamilies are recognized, 
supported, and valued within the child welfare system.
From the RFI about kinship families and grandfamilies
“We experience so much from this never-ending nightmare of custody.  
The sleepless nights because of what the system has done to us. The days of not 
eating because we are too upset with what the system that is supposed to be 
protecting these children has done to us. This has caused so much damage …”
Two themes emerged from the RFI responses and SGRG Advisory Council discussions:
1. Kin and grandparent caregivers are often excluded from existing systems to
financially assist families.
2. They struggle to navigate variable and disjointed federal, state, and local
systems that, in the words of one respondent, “don’t talk to one another.” Each
state has differing laws, procedures, and definitions that shape the experience
of kin and grandparent caregivers, and those experiences are often not
synchronized with federal programs.
The result of these intertwined issues is that some legal relationships, health and 
academic records, and case files are often not portable—even as children move 
to new homes and schools. This creates a cascade of stress, legal ambiguity, and 
financial hardship for more than 2.7 million kin and grandparent caregivers, many of 
whom are older adults and/or people with disabilities.3
Meaningful change in the child welfare system will itself require a dedicated strategy for 
aligning legal systems across states and with the nation. It will also require significant 
federal intervention to redefine eligibility criteria for programs (e.g., broaden the definition 
of family) that have traditionally not included kin and grandparent caregivers in informal 
relationships and to change the public narrative about kin and grandparent caregivers 
raising children outside of the foster care system. They should be accorded the same 
respect and status as licensed foster parents. And they should enjoy the same benefits 
and rights, including the same levels of financial and logistical assistance.

[page 66]
National Strategy to Support Family Caregivers Page 66
In the short term, there are actions states and communities can take now to explore 
and implement systems changes to better assist kin and grandparent caregivers and 
the children. States and/or communities can start by identifying and documenting 
existing inequities faced by kin and grandparent caregivers within specific state and 
local communities. Topics to cover include access to health care, access to financial 
resources, and data sharing. (Also supports Outcomes 1.1 and 5.1)
Family caregiving stakeholders can take steps to ensure that all websites, program 
descriptions, reports, media, and other materials use language and images that are 
inclusive of kin and grandparent caregiving situations and needs. (Also supports 
Outcome 1.1) States, health systems, communities, community-based organizations, 
faith-based organizations, school districts, and other stakeholders can prioritize the 
hiring of people with lived experience so that the child welfare system and the systems 
with which it interacts are infused with the real-world knowledge, experience, and 
voices of kin and grandparent caregivers. (Also supports Outcome 3.1)
The Colorado Child Welfare Family Advisory Council guides policymakers in the 
state on the design and delivery of high-quality child welfare services to youth and 
families. Members can be any of the following: biological parents, “grandfamilies” 
(non-certified grandparent), kinship family member providing non-certified out of 
home care, certified kinship foster parent, youth formerly in care and now out of 
care, foster parent (non-kinship), foster/adoptive parent (non-kinship), community 
partner providing services to youth in foster care.
A foundational belief of the SGRG Advisory Council is that children should grow up 
in the care of their own families. When it comes to keeping families together, there 
are several additional opportunities states and communities can leverage under 
existing law. For example, states can establish agreements, as allowable under 
Title IV-B of the Social Security Act, with tribes to provide culturally competent 
services to American Indian and Alaska Native Families. They can also look for ways 
to optimize use of Title IV-B funding (including Promoting Safe and Stable Families 
funds) to provide kinship-specific support services. State and legal advocacy groups 
may find it beneficial to develop guidance documents that explain how Title IV-B 
can be used to support kin and grandparent caregivers. (Also supports Outcome 
3.1) They can also adopt the National Model Family Foster Care Standards (and 
ideally the more detailed National  Association for Regulatory Administration Family 
Foster Care Licensing Standards) to address barriers to licensing kin and foster 
parents. (Also supports Outcome 4.1) Those states that use Temporary Assistance 
for Needy Families (TANF) for child support issues, may wish to broaden the term 
“family” so that it includes all kin and grandparent caregivers and form relationships 
with neighboring states so that program participation is transferable when a person 
moves across state lines.

[page 67]
National Strategy to Support Family Caregivers Page 67
To ensure the needs of kin and grandparent caregivers are reflected in all future 
planning, states can establish interagency child welfare task forces that include 
caregivers, children, child welfare professionals, attorneys, social services providers, 
medical professionals, and mental health experts to guide and inform the work of the 
child welfare system. (Also supports Outcomes 3.1 and 4.1)
States can use Title IV-B, subpart 2 funding to develop, enhance, and evaluate kinship 
navigator programs that serve kinship families both inside and outside the system. 
They can also explore participating in Title IV-E Guardianship Assistance program 
to facilitate child placements with relatives as a permanency option. (Also supports 
Outcome 4.1)
As previously noted, quality longitudinal data on kin and grandparent caregivers 
and the children they support is lacking. All stakeholders can collaborate to redress 
this imbalance through engaging in (or providing funding for) robust data collection 
efforts that are aligned with the goals of the Strategy. (Also supports Outcome 5.1) 
Such efforts should include data about children in the child welfare system and those 
children who have passed through the system and those children who come to the 
attention of the child welfare system but never enter the system. (Also supports 
Outcome 5.1)
Aligned Actions
Federal agencies have committed to 2 specific actions within the coming years in 
support of Outcome 3.10. See “Actions for Others” for more than 50 additional 
actions that states, communities, and other stakeholders can take to support Goal 3.
Indicators of Success: Services and Supports
As the actions under Goal 3 are implemented and the outcomes realized, family, kin, and 
grandparent caregivers will feel more confident in their ability to provide care because:
Person- and family-centered, trauma-informed support are the norm.
Information about services and supports for individuals needing car
e and to 
support those providing that car e is available on a family car
egiving information 
platform, so when a caregiver faces a new challenge, they immediately know 
where to turn.
When family caregivers need a short break, they have a robust array of trained 
respite options available that are local, convenient, and af for
dable.
Caregivers can tap into a community of fellow family caregivers who can 
empathize with their experiences and share insights from their own experiences.

[page 68]
National Strategy to Support Family Caregivers Page 68
Technologies and tools to assist family caregivers are designed with caregiver 
input and tested by caregivers.
Communities have robust pools of vetted and trained volunteers to assist family 
caregivers.
Caregivers have a plan in place for what to do if they can no longer pr
ovide care.
In emergency situations, first responders are prepared to identify and support 
family caregivers.
Every family caregiver has an emergency kit that includes legal documents, if  
needed.
Dir
ect care workers have career paths, flexibilities, and compensation packages 
that make the field attractive to young people.
Direct care workers will have the training they need to deliver high-quality care.
Clear and consistent processes will exist for screening and hiring direct care 
workers.
The default assumption, if a child is removed from their home, is to place them 
with kin first. (As a r esult of this, caseworkers would need special permission to 
place a child with non-r elatives.)
Child welfar
e agencies hire lived experience experts at both the leadership and 
caseworker levels, and that lived expertise informs all levels of decision making.
The needs and perspective of informal kinship families—those who are raising 
children outside of the foster care system—ar e r
ecognized by child welfare 
workers as equally important as foster families.

[page 69]
National Strategy to Support Family Caregivers Page 69
Goal 4: Ensure ﬁnancial and workplace security for 
family caregivers
Personal finances and future financial security are a significant source of stress for 
family caregivers. Family caregivers face multiple financial threats associated with 
their family caregiving responsibilities. They experience significant out-of-pocket 
expenses and depletion of leave time as the majority of workplace policies do not 
allow sufficient paid time off or workplace flexibility to accommodate unexpected 
family caregiving duties. In addition, many are forced to leave the workforce in order to 
dedicate sufficient hours of care to a family member, which results in loss of income. 
Many are concerned about the ability to accommodate the needs of the person 
receiving support (including costs associated with health care, health supplies and 
equipment, housing, and support services) as well as their own financial security, 
now and into the future.
The RAISE Act State Policy Roadmap for Family Caregivers (Section 4: Financial 
and Workplace Security), developed by NASHP , provides examples of successful 
state strategies for improving financial and workplace security for employed 
caregivers.
Some programs do offer support that can help defray costs associated with home 
modifications, transportation, and legal fees, but those resources are limited and 
unevenly distributed across the nation. Financial assistance programs such as TANF 
are available to some kin and grandparent caregivers, but the amounts are often not 
enough to cover basic needs. Moreover, TANF is, by definition, a temporary benefit. 
Foster care maintenance payments, which are significantly higher than TANF, are not 
made available to most grandparent or kin caregivers. Altogether, there are many 
opportunities to ensure that family caregivers can provide care without putting their 
financial security—and that of their family—at risk.4
Outcome 4.1: Family caregivers can provide care without negative 
impacts to their near- and long-term ﬁnancial health.
From our Listening Sessions
“When it gets to the point of [FMLA] eligibility requirements, [I suggest] it not 
be restricted to biological or legal family members … the older adults could 
designate who is eligible to receive these supports from services apart from kin.”
Among input received by the Advisory Councils, the strongest recurrent theme 
focused on the need for the federal government to take the lead on several priority 
actions that, if implemented, have the potential to collectively change the financial

[page 70]
National Strategy to Support Family Caregivers Page 70
landscape for family caregivers in this country. Participants in the key informant 
and family caregiver listening sessions repeatedly called for expansion of leave 
programs at the federal level and tax credits for family caregivers. These topics were 
also discussed extensively by the Advisory Councils and identified as a real need in 
relation to many aspects of family caregiving (out-of-pocket costs, paying for college, 
housing, etc.) As a result, the Advisory Councils see the current moment as a call to 
action for advocacy efforts to:
Establish a national program of paid family leave for workers.
Extend family leave pr
ograms so that they are available to all workers across 
the country.
Provide r
efundable federal tax credits for family caregivers.
Those changes are outlined in Table 1, Legislative and Other Policy Changes to  
Support Family Car
egivers.
Leave Programs, Discrimination Protections, and Tax Credits
Even in the absence of Congressional action, other sectors can still play a role in 
easing the financial shocks that can come with caregiving. If not already doing so, 
states and health plans may wish to explore opportunities to provide payment to family 
caregivers to the greatest extent allowed. (Also supports Outcome 4.1)5
State lawmakers can explore opportunities to launch leave programs for family 
caregivers. Such programs should include paid sick leave and paid family leave. States 
also can take action to broaden eligibility for leave and other related employment 
programs by using the broadest possible definition of family. Such action could ensure 
all types of caregivers, including grandparent and kin caregivers and non-relative 
caregivers, benefit from these programs.
State lawmakers can also take concrete action to protect family caregivers from 
employment discrimination through amending labor laws. As major employers 
themselves, states can lead by example by creating benefits packages for state 
workers that are caregiver-friendly.
States that are not currently offering tax credits to family caregivers may want to 
explore opportunities to do so. As of 2022, nine states allow family caregivers 
to claim some caregiving-related expenses as refundable tax credits. For further 
discussion on states that offer tax credits for family caregivers, see RAISE Act State 
Policy Roadmap  for Family Caregivers: Financial and Workplace Security for 
Family Caregivers
 
.

[page 71]
National Strategy to Support Family Caregivers Page 71
Public Education
A key theme of the RFI responses was that even when programs are available, family 
caregivers often struggle to learn about them. Planning for public education campaigns 
and other outreach about tax credits and employment programs should be included in 
the development of new programs. Such programs should then be promoted on the 
caregiving platform described under Outcome 1.1.
As state laws and benefits change over time, outreach campaigns should be 
developed to ensure that employers and employed family caregivers have access to 
up-to-date information about financial programs that could assist them. All sectors 
will need to contribute to ensuring that all populations of family caregivers are aware 
of and can benefit from these changes. If Congress expands programs for family 
caregivers, all sectors should commit resources to expand access for historically 
excluded populations of family caregivers. (Also supports Outcomes 1.1 and 1.3)
Aligned Actions
Federal agencies have committed to 7 specific actions within the coming years in 
support of Outcome 4.1. See “Actions for Others” for more than 50 additional actions 
that states, communities, and other stakeholders can take to support Goal 4.
Outcome 4.2: Family caregivers have access to employee-centered 
ﬂexible workplace policies and practices that support work/life balance 
and professional performance when personal circumstances change.
From our Listening Sessions
“If folks are afraid to raise their hand and call themselves a caregiver  
or to utilize a beneﬁt for a caregiver because they’re afraid they’ll be  
ﬁred, it’s not about awareness alone. It’s about infrastructure of  
support that enable that recognition.”
Nearly two-thirds of family caregivers who work full time say the stress of juggling work 
and caregiving is either the first or second biggest challenge they face. A study by the 
U.S. Government Accountability Office (GAO), Retirement Security: Some Parental 
and Spousal Caregivers Face Financial Risks, estimated that 68 percent of working 
caregivers who support either a spouse or a parent had to adjust their schedules, a 
decision that can affect career progression and financial security across decades, 
especially for women.
Legislative changes at the federal and state levels to leave programs and tax incentives 
are two priority ways to improve work-life balance for family caregivers. There is 
also much that employers can do to make it easier for family caregivers to maintain

[page 72]
National Strategy to Support Family Caregivers Page 72
employment. This also benefits employers—investing in family caregiver support can 
pay off for employers both in terms of attracting talent and increasing retention.
Research and Employment Learning Collaboratives
Currently, very little high-quality research has been published on best practices for 
supporting family caregivers in the workplace. There is a real need for partnerships 
between states, employers, and researchers to create a robust infrastructure 
for sharing resources that support family caregivers, such as through learning 
collaboratives that can provide evidence to guide policy. Labor analysts and 
economists can support these efforts through research into the return on investment 
for supporting family caregivers. Stakeholders can help promulgate the findings of this 
research and spur further investigations. (Also supports Outcomes 1.1 and 5.1)
Caregiver-Friendly Work Culture
Employers can foster a culture that recognizes family caregiving and adopt policies 
and programs that make it easier for family caregivers to juggle caregiving and work. 
Examples include expanding the definition of family so that employee benefits like 
leave programs, health plans, and other programs better meet the needs of family 
caregivers.6 This can also include adding flexible leave policies; allowing family 
caregivers to use flexible work hours, compressed work weeks, and telework; and 
structuring job descriptions around tasks that can be completed remotely, at flexible 
times of day. 
Leave donation programs are an example of how a program can support family 
caregivers and raise awareness among non-caregivers of opportunities to support 
them. Promoting such programs in the workplace drives awareness among employees 
of the needs of family caregivers and helps create an organizational culture where 
they feel supported and welcome because caregiving is normalized. Researchers can 
support this effort by identifying and sharing best practices and research findings for 
employers on supporting family caregivers in the workplace. (Also supports Outcomes 
1.1 and 3.6)
Employers can also consider adopting other caregiver-friendly workplace policies, such 
as joining an employer certification program for identifying and credentialing “caregiver 
friendly” workplaces, hosting family caregiver events and observances, featuring a 
wide range of family caregivers in employee handbooks and trainings, and providing 
easy to understand educational materials about Social Security, health insurance, and 
Medicare deductions, as well as eligibility for Medicaid and Children’s Health Insurance 
Program (CHIP).
To increase efficiency in these efforts, employers may wish to create communities of 
practice with state agencies modeled on the Massachusetts Caregiving Initiative (See

[page 73]
National Strategy to Support Family Caregivers Page 73
box). Such an initiative could promote caregiver-friendly workplaces in the state (or 
industry) and promulgate promising practices associated with being a family caregiver-
friendly workplace. (Also supports Outcomes 1.1 and 5.3)
Beneﬁts That Attract and Retain Family Caregivers
Employers can also consider family caregiver issues and needs when designing 
benefits packages. Examples include providing advanced planning support for family 
caregivers or prioritizing Employee Assistance Programs (EAP) that include support 
to family caregivers in their roster of available services. To ensure that workers have 
current information on local services, community-based organizations, faith-based 
organizations, and others, community organizations should consider attending 
employee benefits fairs and other events to disseminate information about existing 
services and help increase family caregiver identification. (Also supports Outcome 1.2)
The Massachusetts Caregiving Initiative released the Massachusetts Employer 
Toolkit to Support Working Caregivers. The toolkit includes a business case for 
supporting caregivers, employee questionnaires, best practices, a case study, 
and descriptions of state-based resources to assist caregivers.
Educate Managers on Supervising Family Caregivers
New managers and supervisors should receive training on the needs of family 
caregivers in the workplace. Such trainings should encompass the full range of family 
caregivers in the workplace from caregiving youth with part-time jobs to full-time 
professionals juggling career and caregiving—and everything in between. Human 
resources organizations and curriculum developers should develop management 
trainings on the issues faced by family caregivers, including caregiving youth, when 
they are caring for someone with a chronic condition or who is at the end of life. 
Authors and publishers of business management books and periodicals should 
explore topics and themes about “caregiving in the workplace.” When firms update 
management trainings, it is important to include language and visuals that reflect all 
caregivers. (Also supports Outcome 1.1)
Aligned Actions
Federal agencies have committed to 7 specific actions within the coming years in 
support of Outcome 4.2. See “Actions for Others” for more than 50 additional actions 
that states, communities, and other stakeholders can take to support Goal 4.
Outcome 4.3: Family caregivers have access to and use of ﬁnancial 
education and advance planning tools.

[page 74]
National Strategy to Support Family Caregivers Page 74
From our Listening Sessions
“A lot of the stress of caregiving is ﬁnances … so understanding and  
having tools to help with saving earlier, understanding what those needs are, and 
options for long-term care insurance … I think is really critical.”
Caregivers often need assistance with long- and short-term financial planning. That 
assistance must go beyond bookkeeping basics and recognize the fact that family 
caregivers need help planning. The financial requirements of their role often exceed 
their available resources, and many family caregivers put their careers on hold or 
lose income. In addition, the available systems of support, such as TANF and other 
safety net programs, are often difficult to navigate and/or access. This is even more 
critical for specific populations of family caregivers, such as those with more intense 
caregiving responsibilities, parents of children with complex health care needs, and kin 
and grandparent caregivers.
Concerns about financial security were a recurring theme of the RFI responses and 
among the participants in the focus groups. Of particular concern to many family 
caregivers is how care recipients will be supported in the event the family caregiver is 
no longer available to provide care. Many kin and grandparent caregivers also have 
continual concerns about how to meet the costs of health care, health supplies/
equipment, school supplies, housing, and other needs for the individuals receiving their 
care. As a result of these complex and interdependent challenges, family caregivers 
need a range of information and resources to support sound financial decisions 
and future planning for themselves and the individuals in their care. (Also supports 
Outcome 3.1)
Increase Access to Planning Services
Advance planning and decision-making supports are crucial legal and financial tools 
for family caregivers. Without these supports, family caregivers and the individuals 
receiving their assistance are at risk if they are no longer able to provide care. At 
particular risk are children who are in the care of kin and grandparent caregivers 
without a clear legal arrangement such as custody or guardianship.
Work/Life Resource Navigators are a phone/text/email-based benefit that an 
increasing number of employers are now offering. The trained coaches focus on 
topics like caregiving, paying bills, budget optimization, trauma-informed care, 
and understanding assistance programs and options.
The child welfare system, legal aid programs, and community-based, or faith-based 
organizations can work to address these issues by providing greater access to pro

[page 75]
National Strategy to Support Family Caregivers Page 75
bono and low-cost services and supports that focus specifically on developing legal 
and financial arrangements for people who are supported by caregivers. (Also supports 
Outcomes 3.1 and 3.6)
Employers can ask their Employee Assistance Program (EAP) vendors to offer 
caregiver support services such as financial planning, as part of the confidential 
information, support, and referral services these programs offer. Employers can include 
caregiving employees with consultations with financial advisors, who are trained in 
trauma-informed support, as part of their benefits package. (Also supports Outcome 
3.1) Communities and social services providers can also promote the availability of 
financial planning services to family caregivers.
Aligned Actions
Federal agencies have committed to 7 specific actions within the coming years in 
support of Outcome 4.3. See “Actions for Others” for more than 50 additional actions 
that states, communities, and other stakeholders can take to support Goal 4.
Outcome 4.4: Long-term services and supports are more affordable, 
allowing family caregivers to reduce their out-of-pocket costs.
The quality of life of older adults and individuals with all types of disabilities is closely 
tied to the services they receive in home and community-based settings. Among these 
services are residential supports, personal care services, mental health services, and 
community living supports. While Medicaid is the largest public provider of covered 
long-term care services, on average, more than half of long-term care costs are paid 
out of pocket by individuals and families. When families cannot afford these services, 
family caregivers are often called upon to fill the gaps, which can increase family 
caregiver stress.
From our Listening Sessions
“I would urge everyone to focus on overall long-term care ﬁnancing  
reform. That’s where the likely real change is going to be. I would suggest  
the council needs [to work with] other entities within the government …  
That’s going to be the key. Also bring in some of the experts from  
Washington State and see what’s worked, what hasn’t worked.”
The WA Cares Fund is investigating ways of making LTC affordable for all workers 
in the state. Starting in July 2026, each person who is eligible to receive the benefit 
can access care costing up to $36,500 (adjusted annually) over their lifetime. To 
access benefits, an individual must need assistance with at least three ADLs.

[page 76]
National Strategy to Support Family Caregivers Page 76
Affordable Supports and Services
An area of consensus among the focus group participants was the need for a national 
long-term care insurance program. Such a program would enable employees to pay 
a monthly premium for guaranteed coverage of a flexible set of goods and services 
necessary for maintaining status in the community. In support of this, employers may 
wish to offer benefits that make long-term services and supports more affordable for 
their family caregiver employees. Examples include leave donation programs, respite 
programs, onsite adult day care, family caregiver training, and voluntary long-term care 
(LTC) insurance.
States and insurance providers also can partner to develop more tools for consumers 
that protect against the costs of long-term care, such as health savings accounts, 
affordable stand-alone policies, hybrid life insurance models, annuities with LTC 
benefits, and term-life insurance that converts to LTC insurance at age 65.
Advocates, researchers, and policymakers should continue to research barriers to 
funding LTC. States may wish to explore ways to expand Medicaid HCBS programs, 
as well as state-funded programs supporting family caregivers. Insurers may wish 
to explore partnerships with HCBS providers to test offering HCBS as Medicare 
Advantage supplemental benefits. The two papers commissioned by the Advisory 
Councils speak to opportunities for both programs to proactively address the needs of 
family caregivers:
Medicaid Supports for Family Caregivers by Neva Kaye and Salom Teshale, 
Ph.D.
Medicar
e and Family Caregivers by Judith A. Stein, J.D., and David A. 
Lipschutz, J.D.
State officials seeking to better understand the state policy landscape for 
supporting family car
egivers can review the RAISE Act State Policy Roadmap for   
Family Car
egivers developed by NASHP
.
Aligned Actions
Federal agencies have committed to 1 specific action within the coming years in 
support of Outcome 4.4. See “Actions for Others” for more than 50 additional actions 
that states, communities, and other stakeholders can take to support Goal 4.
Indicators of Success: Financial and Employment Protections
As the actions under Goal 4 are implemented, family caregivers will experience greater 
financial security as the following social changes take place:

[page 77]
National Strategy to Support Family Caregivers Page 77
Older adults, people with disabilities, and their families will no longer have to 
deplete their savings/assets to qualify for Medicaid to access much needed 
long- term services and supports; they will be able to stay in their own homes 
where they most often want to receive care and live.
Caregivers have access to high-quality and appropriate financial education and 
planning services and support, such as time off and flexible work schedules for 
caregiving.
Family and kinship car
egivers see their experiences reflected in new policies 
that reduce the financial consequences of family caregivers.
Instead of feeling forced to give up their own careers, family car
egivers will be 
able to help their family members access services and supports to help meet 
their needs.
Caregivers are able provide car
e without being anxious about their financial 
status later in life.
Caregivers do not have to choose between paying for their own necessities and 
caregiving expenses.
If they are employed, family caregivers can better balance car egiving and
 
meaningful employment.
Caregivers feel comfortable talking to their colleagues and management about 
caregiving at work.
Managers receive training in how to support employees on their teams, 
including those with caregiving r
esponsibilities.
Caregivers who pr ovide financial management for another have mor
e accessible 
and available tools and technologies that make it easier and more effective to 
safeguard the assets of someone else.
Car
egivers who leave the workforce to provide care can access needed services 
and take time off work for caregiving without losing Social Security “quarters of 
coverage.”
Caregivers with primary r
esponsibility for care have access to paid leave and 
flexible work policies
Long-term care insurance options are available across the lifespan that reduce 
the burden on family caregivers and support community living.

[page 78]
National Strategy to Support Family Caregivers Page 78
Goal 5: Expand data, research, and evidence-based 
practices to support family caregivers
As the RAISE Act initial report to Congress found, the experience of caregiving can 
leave family caregivers financially, emotionally, and physically depleted. Yet, despite 
a growing body of research, there is limited infrastructure for the collection of 
comprehensive, population-based data about the prevalence of caregiving and the 
context in which care is provided, or the financial, emotional, and physical impacts 
of caregiving.7 In addition, we lack a national research infrastructure that is inclusive 
of the full range of family caregiving (e.g., episodic, chronic, long-distance, etc.), 
the relationship between the family caregiver and the person receiving care, and all 
caregiving conditions and disabilities.
Most national surveys do not contain questions that identify family caregivers. Data 
sources that do include family caregivers often use inconsistent definitions that make it 
hard for researchers to synthesize data sets to achieve outcomes, such as determining 
the economic value of caregiving and the opportunity costs for family caregivers. There 
is still much to learn and document about how public policies can improve well-being 
for family caregivers, especially over time. Identification of family caregivers continues 
to pose a challenge, which could have long-term impacts on public spending and 
allocations for the delivery of services.
As of 2022, there is no major body of work to provide information about the 
experiences of caregiving youth. Similarly, there is little information on the impacts of 
sibling caregiving or the needs of children who live in families where the parents are 
full-time family caregivers to other relatives. There is very limited available research 
on family caregivers who themselves identify as disabled. Nor are family caregivers 
included in biomedical clinical trials or medical device development, which means 
the nation has scant information on the extent to which the presence of a trained 
family caregiver affects efficacy of medical and social services interventions. When 
studies do assess family caregiver experiences, they often mistakenly assume the 
family caregiver perspective reflects the patient experience, when in fact, they can be 
markedly different.
Goal 5 is a prerequisite to the success of the Strategy and should be among the 
highest priority efforts by all sectors. These efforts will need to be iterative. In 
coordination with the achievement of other goals, these efforts can ensure that the 
nation has the knowledge and data necessary to adequately recognize, assist, and 
support family caregivers.

[page 79]
National Strategy to Support Family Caregivers Page 79
Outcome 5.1: A national infrastructure will exist to support the collection 
of population-based data, using standardized wording of the deﬁnition 
of family caregiving and standardized wording of questions that address 
the core characteristics of the family caregiving experience.
From our Listening Sessions
“As more data emerges to show that caregivers are kick ass people  
and that they are really good workers … the education goes up, the stigma  
goes down and we start making some headway.”
Over the past three decades, scientific research has significantly increased our 
understanding of family caregiving, but critical gaps in knowledge remain. Much of 
what is known about family caregivers is based on single research site, smaller-scale 
studies or surveys conducted with convenience samples. Additionally, a single, well-
accepted definition of the term “family caregiver” has not emerged from the field. 
Yet, available data, as demonstrated in both Advisory Councils’ reports to Congress, 
strongly suggest the urgency of increased support to family caregivers. Current data 
also point to the need for more standardized, population-based studies to confirm 
the prevalence of family caregiving in the U.S., identify the contextual factors in 
which families provide care, document the impacts of providing care on people with 
disabilities, as well as impacts to the overall family structure and family relationships, 
and to evaluate existing and new care models and programs intended to provide 
support to family caregivers.
Enterprise Data Strategy
While other aspects of the Strategy call for collective, organic efforts across and 
within sectors, desired outcomes related to Goal 5 likely require a different approach. 
Because data, research, and identification and promulgation of evidence-based 
practices inform the success of the other goals of the Strategy, the Advisory Councils 
have identified the need for an enterprise data strategy which should be developed 
through a public-private partnership composed of three key groups:
1. Those federal and state bodies that collect and maintain data related to health 
care delivery and outcomes, health care utilization and associated cost, and 
demographic and epidemiological data, as well as data on a wide collection of 
lifestyle variables including health behaviors, employment, and income.
2. Private entities capable of either providing analogous data, such as actuaries, 
major employers, health insurers, and private entities capable of integrating data 
from multiple sources using advanced technology while assuring complete data 
privacy and security.

[page 80]
National Strategy to Support Family Caregivers Page 80
3. Academic institutions, technology start-ups, think tanks, researchers, nonprofit 
organizations, and national philanthropic organizations.
Governing Body
An enterprise data strategy should be informed and led by a governing body that 
would determine a process for understanding which data sets have the most utility for 
understanding family caregiving needs and supports. The governing body should work 
quickly to determine a process for standardizing data and creating a common data 
structure. This should include a uniform set of research questions to identify individuals 
as family caregivers. Questions about the family caregiving experience should also be 
integrated into existing data collection tools to expand insights into prevalence and 
trends in family caregiving. (Also supports Outcomes 1.1, 1.3, and 5.3)
Refer to The Changing Landscape of Family Caregiving in the United States by 
Vicki A. Freedman and Jennifer L. Wolf for a discussion of data sources and the 
challenges associated with measuring and defining family caregiving.
Such efforts will ensure that when researchers design studies, a common set of 
categories of data with a consistent taxonomy is used. The development of a body 
of knowledge using common terminology and data sets will allow researchers to 
compare data across caregiving populations and sectors. For example, as described 
in the RAISE Act initial Report to Congress, multiple surveys currently exist to 
count the prevalence of family caregiving. Each study has variations that prevent 
aggregating the data to create a full picture of the prevalence of caregiving. They use 
differing definitions of caregiving (e.g., “caregivers of older adults,” “grandparent-led 
households,” etc.), they define ages of care recipients differently (e.g., adults only vs. 
care recipients of all ages), and each uses a different time span for length of care (e.g., 
years vs. months). As a result, researchers cannot compare or combine data sets to 
identify the actual number of family caregivers in the U.S. In addition to consistent 
data definitions, a consistent data structure would standardize these disparate sources 
of information so that they could be aggregated and used to better understand and 
predict outcomes.
Data consistency and aggregation allows researchers to study population groups 
over time, homing in on actions and interventions for specific types of caregiving at 
precise stages of illness, helping family caregivers in the short term, and eventually 
longitudinally. Additionally, this consistent approach will allow data sharing between 
previously disparate partners so that older studies can be replicated and used to 
advance current research. It will also enable economists to continue to quantify how 
caregiving support impacts health care and social services outcomes and spending.

[page 81]
National Strategy to Support Family Caregivers Page 81
Data Storage and Access
Once a standardized data structure is determined and agreed upon, the participants 
in the partnership would need to develop processes for creating a shared repository  
designed to store, process, and secure large amounts of data with differing structures 
side-by-side. The ability to store that data in a range of formats and sizes will allow 
for flexibility as new types of data about caregiving emerge. From this pool of data, 
researchers would then be able to draw information and material for a variety of uses, 
such as research and prevalence studies, building algorithms, predictive analytics, and 
machine learning. To safeguard privacy of individuals and competitive data owned by 
firms participating in the effort, this process would need to include security measures 
such as information assurance and data safeguarding procedures.
In 2008, the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) and the aviation industry 
developed the Aviation Safety Information Analysis and Sharing (ASIAS) program 
to promote an open exchange of safety information to continuously improve 
aviation safety. Over 200 public and private entities participate, which allows the 
FAA to draw together a wide variety of airline safety data and aviation information 
sources from across government and private industry. Its data set currently 
includes 99 percent of all U.S. air carrier operations in U.S. airspace.
Once the data is gathered, there would be a need to increase the analytical capability 
and information-sharing of researchers authorized to access the information. This will 
allow for analysis of non-related datasets into such topics as how family caregiver 
supports, like respite, affect nursing home admission rates. The governing body can 
also promote integration of caregiving-related queries into existing data collection tools 
to expand insights and understanding of trends in family caregiving.
Outcome 5.1 also calls for the establishment of a baseline of data that documents the 
impact of caregiving on finances, productivity, and profits so that these findings can be 
disseminated as part of Outcome 1.1 and shape the development of services under 
Outcome 3.1. To achieve this, the outcome of 5.1 will depend on participation from 
stakeholders who may not think of themselves as part of the caregiving ecosystem, 
like retailers, financial institutions, and transportation providers.
State agencies and national, state, regional, and local philanthropic organizations 
are encouraged to collaborate with major employers to collect systemic data related 
to caregiving and ensure it reaches academic institutions. For example, researchers 
looking for the impact of paid leave on nursing home placements and reducing health 
care costs would benefit from data about use of leave from large employers who 
provide paid leave.

[page 82]
National Strategy to Support Family Caregivers Page 82
As the Advisory Councils have noted, there is no one-size-fits-all solution to supporting 
family caregivers. Other entities such as local chambers of commerce, unions, human 
resources societies, and insurance companies can also advocate for and participate in 
coordinated data collection and sharing for the purposes of creating a unified means 
of measuring and documenting the needs of family caregivers and what interventions 
support them.
Aligned Actions
Federal agencies have committed to 17 specific actions within the coming years in 
support of Outcome 5.1. See “Actions for Others” for more than 50 additional actions
that states, communities, and other stakeholders can take to support Goal 5.
 
Outcome 5.2: Family caregiver research facilitates the development and 
delivery of programs and services that support and enhance the health 
and well-being of the family caregiver and the person receiving support.
From our Listening Sessions
“One of the best ways to increase family caregiver research … 
is to either require or incentivize it.”
The availability of evidence-based and evidence-informed interventions is important 
for the delivery of an array of person-centered, trauma-informed services and 
supports described under Outcome 3.1. In addition to creating an enterprise data 
strategy related to caregiving to support Outcome 5.1, major research institutions 
and philanthropic organizations may wish to partner in a parallel effort with other 
stakeholders in the research community to establish a national research agenda on 
caregiving. This agenda should prioritize research goals for the coming decade and 
ensure that those goals are aligned with the Strategy and that the data collected 
is interoperable with the enterprise structure described above.  Priorities of the 
research agenda could include:
Advancing research on the modeling and measurement of the total value of 
family car
egiving and translating these models and measurements into research 
leading to findings to guide business models, health systems, insurers and 
payers, and employers. (Also supports Outcomes 2.1, 4.1, 4.2, and 4.3)
Developing models for the sharing of health information with family caregivers 
that honor and promote self-dir ection and autonomy for the person r
eceiving 
support. (Also supports Outcomes 2.2 and 2.3)
Encouraging the study of family caregivers in the workplace, including the role 
of the employer and the value of employers investing in workplace caregiving/
family supports. (Also supports Outcome 4.2)

[page 83]
National Strategy to Support Family Caregivers Page 83
Stimulating the next generation of family caregiver support programs (i.e., 
interventions) that build on the approaches and mechanisms proven effective in 
prior research but are adapted to the needs of family caregivers in communities 
that have traditionally not been represented in caregiver support programs.
Promoting the development and use of culturally competent and meaningful 
family caregiver assessment tools.
Aligning existing pr otocols in health and social service pr
ovider systems to 
facilitate rapid transition from resear ch to services. (Also supports 
Outcomes 
2.2 and 5.3)
Promoting research of cutting-edge technologies and devices that could assist 
family caregivers with caregiving tasks or reduce an individual’
s need for care 
and family caregiver burden. These technologies would need to be designed 
with participation from people with disabilities and could include assistive 
technology for monitoring the location and physical condition of the person 
receiving support, remote home monitoring, and/or web-based applications to 
facilitate the delivery of evidenced-based programs. (Also supports Outcome 
3.5 and 5.1)
Coordinating and supporting data on the need and value of the direct care 
workforce, as well as programs that support and develop the car eers of dir
ect 
care workers. (Also supports Outcome 3.9)
Increasing translation and dissemination of promising and evidence-supported 
practices and models of care to support family caregivers when they are
 
identified in health care and long-term services and supports delivery settings. 
(Also supports Outcome 5.3)
Capturing the potential health care/taxpayer dollar savings over time with 
expansion of coverage for long-term services and supports within not only 
Medicaid but also Medicare and private insurance over time, and how that could 
lower costs and impr
ove health and quality of life. (Also supports Outcome 4.1)
Coordinating and supporting data on children and kin and grandparent 
caregivers of children outside the child welfare system, including those who
 
come to the attention of the child welfare system but are diverted to the care 
of grandparents or other kin without the benefit of supports and services. (Also 
supports Outcome 5.1)
Once an agenda is established to allow for information sharing between institutions 
and ongoing support and maintenance, stakeholders may wish to create a caregiving

[page 84]
National Strategy to Support Family Caregivers Page 84
research portal that uses open architecture design principles and can be accessed 
by a range of researchers. Developers may want to include a “public domain” view so 
that caregivers and non-research-based stakeholders of evidence-based practices 
can review findings and participate in discussions. States can support this by 
collecting more and disaggregated data on family caregiving and the long-term care 
workforce and sharing that data with researchers. Community-based organizations 
can collect and report data on their work, through financial incentives (such as funding 
administrative cost, data collection, and research learning) or through non-financial 
incentives (such as technical support and training) that directly support their programs 
and services. These funded resource incentives should ensure best practices about 
the collection of data are followed.
Aligned Actions
Federal agencies have committed to 20 specific actions within the coming years in 
support of Outcome 5.2. See “Actions for Others” for more than 50 additional actions 
that states, communities, and other stakeholders can take to support Goal 5.
Outcome 5.3: Promising and evidence-informed practices are promoted, 
translated, and disseminated to support family caregivers in the delivery 
of health care and social services.
There are few proven interventions available for family caregivers at the present time. 
Those that have been developed tend to focus on family caregivers of people with 
dementia, and most of those programs have yet to be translated for delivery in real-
world settings. The nation must commit to funding and conducting consistent research 
into culturally adaptable family caregiver interventions for a range of circumstances and 
translating existing research for delivery in clinical and social services systems (defined 
widely to include all health care settings, community-based organizations, and home-
based care providers).
From our Listening Ses sions
“ … This question of, what do we know about what works in terms of supporting 
family caregivers around the transitions and care that will produce better 
outcomes? And I think that’s a big, big, big question and unknown.”
Some policymakers have expressed concern that greater research and data on 
caregiving would lead to a demand for services that could outstrip ability to fund such 
services. However, until economists and data scientists can determine the economic 
value of caregiving and costs in terms of lost opportunities, tax revenue, and spending 
and reduced productivity, states have incomplete data on the actual return on 
investment in supporting family caregivers. Advocates suspect that when all factors are

[page 85]
National Strategy to Support Family Caregivers Page 85
considered, supporting family caregivers may prove to be the efficient financial model 
for providing long-term services and supports.
Researchers and the entities that fund them can lead this effort through designing 
and advocating for research into interventions and models that are aligned with the 
Strategy. These interventions should be person- and family-centered, trauma-informed, 
and adaptable to a range of caregiving circumstances, needs, and cultural sensitivities. 
(Also supports Outcome 3.1) A key component of these efforts should be the 
coordination and support for data collection and demonstrations to improve the direct 
care workforce. (Also supports Outcome 3.9)
Advocates, funding entities, researchers and administrative leaders have a critical role 
in the prioritization of the development and testing of family caregiver identification 
tools that health care and service providers can use to efficiently identify patients 
and clients as family caregivers, including efforts t o  support a person’s ability to 
self-identify as a family caregiver with comfort. This could include:
Innovations in which family caregivers are identified and engaged via electronic 
health r
ecords (EHR), with the consent of the person receiving support.
Models of care that seamlessly integrate care provided by health care providers 
with community-based social service providers. (Also supports Outcome 1.2
, 
2.1, and 2.2)
Independent evaluations of family caregiver services and supports, so promising 
practices can be identified and scaled up.
All available technologies should be explored as a means of supporting wider 
availability of existing evidence-based programs, most of which wer
e designed for in-
person delivery, which has become increasingly difficult.
The findings of research advances suggested above can be used to support various 
aspects of the Strategy. For example, public relations and media professionals 
supporting the campaigns described under Outcome 1.1 can use caregiver 
assessment tools to advance awareness of the availability of proven ways of 
supporting family caregivers. Health care systems and hospitals may wish to identify 
a dedicated resource to serve as a family caregiver experience officer/ambassador 
to develop and oversee best practices for engaging family caregivers in the entire 
medical experience, including pre-hospital services, pre-discharge planning, and 
post-discharge care in support of Outcome 2.3. Through state-level coalitions, 
states, community-based organizations, faith-based organizations, and philanthropic 
organizations can create and share toolkits to educate and support professionals 
working with family caregivers to support Outcome 2.5.

[page 86]
National Strategy to Support Family Caregivers Page 86
Aligned Actions
Federal agencies have committed to 15 specific actions within the coming years in 
support of Outcome 5.3. See “Actions for Others” for more than 50 additional actions 
that states, communities, and other stakeholders can take to support Goal 5.
Indicators of Success: Data, Research, and Evidence-Based Practices
As the actions under Goal 5 are implemented, the supports and services offered to 
family caregivers will increasingly be developed using rigorous data and research 
practices. Examples of such changes include:
State, tribal, local, and federal programs have information collection processes 
on family car
egiving across the lifespan that are consistent and comparable 
between programs and governmental entities.
A formal data collection process, coordinated at a national level, leads to a body 
of evidence to develop, plan, and coordinate resour
ces, services, and supports, 
and helps to identify and document the economic value of family caregiving.
Researchers can document the needs and impact of caregiving on different 
types of family caregivers across the lifespan.
A core set of family car
egiver questions is available to add to existing national 
and state surveys.
Surveys are available in a variety of formats and languages so that as many 
family car egivers as possible can participate.
Family caregivers and the people r eceiving support ar
e involved as research 
partners in the design and the delivery of services and plan a prominent role in  
the successful utilization, evaluation, and sustainment of needed services.
Family car
egivers see themselves fully represented in evidence-based practices 
that will improve their health and well-being and the health and well-being of 
those for whom they care.
Family car
egiver support programs (i.e., interventions) are adapted to the real-
world experiences of today’s caregivers.
Family caregiving pr
ograms and interventions are evaluated to inform the 
evidence base for promising practices and lessons learned (i.e., what works and  
what does not).

[page 87]
National Strategy to Support Family Caregivers Page 87
Researchers have access to consistent data that allows them to measure 
progress toward achieving the goals of the Strategy.
Organizations can scale up practices and supports that are proven to be 
impactful and cost-effective.
Resear chers have data on the number of and well-being of childr
en in 
grandfamilies outside of the foster care system.

[page 88]
National Strategy to Support Family Caregivers Page 88
Conclusion
The 2022 National Strategy to Support Family Caregivers proposes an ambitious list of 
approaches that, if acted upon, would begin to move the nation toward ensuring that 
family caregivers are recognized, assisted, included, supported, and engaged across 
the lifespan. National change for caregiving in this country will require participation 
from individuals and a range of stakeholder sectors: federal government, states and 
tribes, philanthropic organizations of all sizes, community-based organizations, faith-
based organizations, school districts, health systems, insurance payers, researchers, 
universities, and every one of us. As each sector and individual takes steps to achieve 
the vision of the Strategy, the Advisory Councils urge that five foundational issues 
remain front of mind:
1. Every American who lives long enough is likely to become a family caregiver, 
need a family caregiver, or both.
2. Family caregivers and care recipients must be included. At every step of 
the way, entities must engage family caregivers and the people they support in 
the planning, execution, and evaluation of any activities designed to advance 
the vision of this Strategy. Such an approach will ensure that outreach, 
engagement, policies, services and supports, and new initiatives are accessible, 
person- and family- centered, trauma-informed, and can meet the needs of the 
populations they are intended to serve.
3. Actions to support family caregivers must be aligned. It is critical that 
actions of stakeholders be aligned with the Strategy to optimize success. 
The Advisory Councils reviewed and considered thousands of suggestions, 
recommendations, actions, and ideas. The information included within the 27 
outcomes of this Strategy is a distillation of the best approaches identified 
through a range of data collection efforts, including focus groups, interviews, 
briefings, and formal requests for information. While the Advisory Councils 
understand that further iterations of this strategy will be necessary ongoing, 
the outcomes and actions contained here represent promising initial steps 
informed by the most up-to-date understanding of how best to immediately 
and consistently address the support needs of millions of family caregivers in a 
range of circumstances.
4. Cross-cutting considerations. Stakeholders are urged to read the overview 
of cross-cutting considerations that affect family caregiving and adopt the 
essential practices to support infusing person- and family centeredness, 
trauma-informed care, and support for direct care workers into caregiver 
services and supports. See First Principles: Cross-Cutting Considerations for 
Family Caregiver Support.

[page 89]
National Strategy to Support Family Caregivers Page 89
5. There is much more work to be done. The publication of the Strategy is a 
beginning, not the end. As government and stakeholders in the public and 
private sectors begin to implement the Strategy, they must also look for 
opportunities to collaborate within and across sectors, leverage resources 
(and authorities, within government agencies) to create the greatest impact, 
and continue to seek opportunities to achieve the outcomes identified by the 
Advisory Councils.
The U.S. sits on the precipice of unprecedented demographic changes that will result 
in a greater need for family caregivers. This first National Strategy to Support Family 
Caregivers provides the foundation to motivate and inform independent undertakings 
by all stakeholders and sectors, as well as guide and direct outcomes toward a unified 
vision—one in which family, kin, and grandparent caregivers are recognized and 
supported for their tremendous, and often life-changing, efforts on behalf of others.
1  For specific discussion on how fostering an agile, flexible, and well-trained direct care workforce can benefit 
family caregivers, see Outcome 3.9 under Goal 3: Strengthen services and supports for family caregivers .
2  For a literature review on the impact of caregiver dyads on outcomes, see Jacops R, Hopkins CS, Fasolino T
 
(2022) Patient-Caregiver Dyad: A Systematic Review Informing a Concept Analysis. Int J Nurs Health Car
e Res 
5: 1298. DOI: https://doi.org/10.29011/2688-9501.101298
3  See the Supporting Grandparents Raising Grandchildren Act Initial Report to Congress. Released by The 
Administration for Community Living, November 2021.
4  For additional information on T ANF, see https://www.gao.gov/assets/gao-12-2.pdf
5  For a discussion on the existing research on how caregivers benefit society of family caregiving, see 
“Societal Benefits” in Families Caring for an Aging America.
6  The Family Medical Leave Act only applies to grandpar ents, parents, spouses and children. Siblings, aunts, 
uncles are not included – as well as other non-traditional family members and domestic partners.
7  Committee on Family Caregiving for Older Adults; Board on Health Care Services; Health and Medicine 
Division; National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine; Schulz R, Eden J, editors. Families 
Caring for an Aging America. Washington (DC): National Academies Press (US); 2016 Nov 8. Available from: 
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK396401/ doi: 10.17226/23606

[page 90]
National Strategy to Support Family Caregivers Page 90
Works Cited
AARP and National Alliance for Caregiving. (2020). Caregiving in the United States 
2020. Washington (DC): AARP .
Alzheimer’s Association. (2021). 2021 Alzheimer’s disease facts and figures. 
Alzheimer’s & Dementia, 16(3), p. 391+.
Ankuda, C. K., Maust, D. T., Kabeto, M. U., McCammon, R. J., Langa, K. M., & Levine, 
D. A. (2017, October). Association between spousal caregiver well-being and care 
recipient healthcare expenditures. Journal of the American Geriatrics Society, 
65(10), pp. 2220-2226.
Annie E. Casey Foundation. (2019). Children in the Care of Grandparents in the United 
States. Kids Count Data Center.
Avison, C., Brock, D., Campione, J., Hassell, S., Rabinovich, B., Ritter, R., Zebrak, K. 
(2018). Outcome evaluation of the National Family Caregiver Support Program. 
Rockville, MD: Westat.
Beach, S. R., Schulz, R., Donovan, H., & Rosland, A.-m. (2021, Jul 13) Family 
Caregiving During the COVID-19 Pandemic. Gerontologist, 5, 650-660.
Bridgeland, J. M., DiIulio, J. J., & Burke Morison, K. (2006). The silent epidemic; 
perspectives of high school dropouts. Civic Enterprises in association with Peter 
D. Hart Research Associates for the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation.
Center for Medicare Advocacy. (2015). Racial and ethnic health care disparities. 
Chari, A. V., Engberg, J., Ray, K. N., & Mehrotra, A. (2015, June 2015) The opportunity 
costs of informal elder-care in the United States: New estimates from the American 
Time Use Survey. Health Services Research, 50(3).
Children’s Bureau. (2020, October). How the child welfare system works [Fact Sheet]. 
Children Welfare Information Gateway.
Choula, R., Snyder, R., & The John A. Hartford Foundation. (2020, December 4) One 
size doesn’t fit all: recognizing diverse caregiver experiences. Next Avenue.
Diverse Elders Coalition. (2021). Caring for those who care.
Fredriksen-Goldsen, K. I., Kim, H.-J., Barkan, S. E., Muraco, A., & Hoy-Ellis, C. P . 
(2013, October). Health disparities among lesbian, gay, and bisexual older adults: 
results from a population-based study. 103(10), 1802-9.

[page 91]
National Strategy to Support Family Caregivers Page 91
Generations United. (2018). Raising the children of the opioid epidemic: Solutions and 
support for grandfamilies. [2018 update].
Hecht, E., Reynolds, M., Agosta, J., McGinley, K., & Moseley, C. (2011). Building 
a national agenda for supporting families with a member with intellectual and 
developmental disability. Report of the Wingspread Conference on building a 
family support agenda, March 6-8, 2011. Racine, WI: Johnson Foundation.
Jewish Federations of North America. (2021). Supporting family caregivers of older 
adults with a history of trauma: Implementation recommendations for the National 
Family Caregiving Strategy.
Kaye, S., Harrington, C., & LaPlante, M. (2010, January). Long-term care: Who gets it, 
who provides it, who pays, and how much? Health Affairs.
Kelly, K., Wolfe, N., Gibson, M. J., & Feinberg, L. (2013). Listening to family caregivers: 
The need to include family caregiver assessment in Medicaid home and 
community-based service waiver programs. Washington (DC): AARP Public Policy 
Institute.
Kuluski K, Peckham A, Gill A, Gagnon D, Wong-Cornall C, McKillop A, Parsons 
J, Sheridan N. What is important to older people with multimorbidity and 
their caregivers? Identifying attributes of person centered care from the user 
perspective. International Journal of Integrative Care (2019, July 23). 19(4).
Matthews, K. A., Xu, W., Gaglioti, A. H., Holt, J. B., Croft, J. B., Mack, D., & McGuire, 
L. C. (2019, January). Racial and ethnic estimates of Alzheimer’s disease and 
related dementias in the United States (2015-2060) in adults aged ≥ 65 years. 
Alzheimers & Dementia, 15(1), 17-24.
Mudrazija, S., & Johnson, R. W. (2020). Economic impacts of programs to support 
caregivers: Final report. Washington (DC): Urban Institute.
National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine. (2016). Families caring 
for an aging America. Washington (DC): The National Academies Press.
National Alliance for Caregiving in Collaboration with United Hospital Fund. (2005).
Young caregivers.
Nong, P ., Minakshi, R., Creary, M., Kardia, S. L., & Platt, J. E. (2020). Patient-reported 
experiences of discrimination in the US health care system. 3(12).

[page 92]
National Strategy to Support Family Caregivers Page 92
PHI. (2020). Direct care workers in the United States: Key facts (2020). Bronx, NY. PHI. 
(2018). The direct care workforce: Year in review (2018). Bronx, NY.
Rainville, C., Skufca, L., & Mehegan, L. (November 2016). Family Caregiving and Out- 
of-Pocket Costs: 2016 Report. Washington (DC).
Ramchand, R., Tanielian, T., Fisher, M. P ., Vaughan, C. A., Trail, T. E., Batka, C.,... 
Ghosh-Dastidar, B. (2014). Hidden heroes: America’s military caregivers. Santa 
Monica, Calif: RAND Corporation.
Reinhard, S. C., Feinberg, L. F., Houser, A., Choula, R., & Evans, M. (2019). Valuing 
the invaluable: 2019 update. AARP Public Policy Institute.
Reinhard, S., Young, S., Levine, C., Kelly, K., Choula, R., & Accius, J. (2019). Home 
Alone Revisited. Washington (DC): AARP Public Policy Institute.
Schulz, R., & Beach, S. R. (1999, December 15). Caregiving as a Risk Factor for 
Mortality; The Caregiver Health Effects Study. JAMA Network, 282(23).
Truskinovsky, Y., Finlay, J. M., & Kobayashi, L. C. (2022, Oct). Caregiving in a 
Pandemic: COVID-19 and the Well-Being of Family Caregivers 55+ in the United 
States. Medical Care Research and Review, 79(5), 663-675.
Wolff, J., Freedman, V., Mulcahy, J., & Kasper, J. (2020). Family caregivers’ 
experiences with health care workers in the care of older adults with activity 
limitations. JAMA Network Open, 3(1).
Zarzycki, M., Seddon, D., Bei, E., Dekel, R., & Morrison, V. (2022, June 23). How 
Culture Shapes Informal Caregiver Motivations: A Meta-Ethnographic Review. 
Qualitative Health Research, 32(10), 1574-1589.

[page 93]
National Strategy to Support Family Caregivers Page 93
Appendix A: Participating Non-Federal Stakeholders
The following individuals served as non-federal members of the Advisory Councils.
RAISE Act Family Caregiving Advisory Council
Ben Bledsoe, M.H.A., President/CEO of the Consumer Direct Care Network
Joe Caldwell, Ph.D. family caregiver and the Director of the Community Living 
Policy Center at the Lurie Institute for Disability Policy, Brandeis University
Diane Caradeuc, family car egiver and federal gover
nment retiree
James S. Cheely, family caregiver and project manager with a general 
contracting company from Glasgow, Kentucky
Jisella Dolan, family car egiver and Global Chief Advocacy Of
ficer for Home 
Instead Senior Care ®
Brenda Gallant, R.N., Executive Director of the Maine Long-Term Care 
Ombudsman Program
Catherine Alicia Georges, Ed.D., RN, FAAN, family caregiver and former AARP 
National Volunteer President
Rhonda J.V . Montgomery
, Ph.D., family caregiver and co-founder of TCARE, Inc.
Nancy Murray, M.S., family caregiver and President of The Arc of Greater 
Pittsburgh and Senior Vice-President of Achieva.
James Murtha, III, MSW , person with a disability and r
eceiver of family 
caregiving, mental health therapist, policy advocate for disability rights, and 
volunteer with the Christopher and Dana Reeve Foundation
Casey R. Shillam, Ph.D., RN, family car egiver
, dean, and professor at the 
University of Portland School of Nursing
Alan B. Stevens, Ph.D., former family caregiver, Vernon D. Holleman-Lewis M. 
Rampy Centennial Chair in Gerontology at Baylor Scott & White Health
Deborah Stone-Walls, family car egiver and member of USAging
Ther
esa Tanous, M.H.A., family caregiver and federal government retiree
Carol Zernial, M.A., Executive Director of the WellMed Charitable Foundation

[page 94]
National Strategy to Support Family Caregivers Page 94
Advisory Council to Support Grandparents Raising Grandchildren
Jaia Peterson Lent, deputy executive director of Generations United
Ethlyn McQueen-Gibson, D.N.P , M.S.N, R.N.-B.C., associate professor and 
director of Ger ontology Center of Excellence at Hampton University
Martha R. Cr
owther, M.P .H, Ph.D., associate dean for research at the University 
of Alabama, College of Community Health Sciences
Patrick Donavan, supervisor with Muskingum County (Ohio) Adult and Child 
Protective Services
Gail Engel, grandparent and founder of Grand Family Coalition
Sarah Hedden, B.S., M.S.W , J.D., attor
ney with the Kinship Care Legal Services 
Program at the Center for Elder Law & Justice in Buffalo, New Y ork
Bette Hoxie, former dir
ector of Adoptive and Foster Families of Maine, Inc. & the 
Kinship Program
Toni Kleckley , M.A. D.Th., grandpar
ent and founder and executive director of 
Trans4mation Now Inc., and the Grandparents Educating Minds pr ogram
Y
vonne S. Lee, M.S.W., professor at West Virginia State University
Linda Miller, R.N., director of the Iowa Department on Aging
Sharon Olson, grandparent and past president of the Minnesota Kinship 
Caregivers Assoc.
Sarah L. Smalls, grandparent and family r esour
ce coordinator for Formed 
Families Forward
Charlotte Stephenson, grandparent and advocate

[page 95]
National Strategy to Support Family Caregivers Page 95
Focus Groups and Key Informant Interviews
Representatives from the following organizations provided input to the focus groups 
and/or interviews.
AARP
Access Living
Alabama Department of Aging
Alliance of Disability Advocates
ALU LIKE, Inc.
Alzheimer’
s Association
Alzheimer’s Orange County
American Bar Association
American Network of Community Options and Resources (ANCOR)
Apna Ghar Home Car
e
Arizona Caregiver Coalition
Association of Programs for Rural Independent Living (APRIL)
ATI Advisory
Autistic Self Advocacy Network
Autism Society of America
Benjamin Rose Institute on Aging
Best of Care Inc.
Brookdale Foundation
California Long-Term Care Education Center
Caregiver Action Network
Cariloop
Caring Together, Living Better (CTLB), AgeOptions
Center for Family Support, University of Pittsburgh
Center for Parent Information and Resources
Center to Advance Palliative Care
Chicago Department of Family & Support Services
Claude Worthington Benedum Foundation
Coalition to Transform Advanced Care (C-TAC)
Colorado Cross-Disability Coalition
Colorado Department of Health Care Policy & Financing
Continuum of Colorado

[page 96]
National Strategy to Support Family Caregivers Page 96
CVS Health
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute
Disability Policy Consortium
Douglas County, NE Board of Commissioners
Duke-Margolis Center for Health Policy, Duke University
Easter
n Idaho Community Action Partnership (EICAP)
Easterseals Iowa
Elizabeth Dole Foundation
Epilepsy Foundation
Family & Nursing Care
Family First
FamilyMeans
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City/New Mexico Caregivers Coalition
Five County Area Agency on Aging
Foster Kinship
Generations United
Global Coalition on Aging (GCOA)
Ha Kupuna (National Resource Center for Native Hawaiian Elders)
Harvard Business School
Health Management Associates
Helper Bees
Helping Hands of Vegas Valley
Henry Ford Caregiver Assistance Resources and Education Program
House Works, LLC
Independent Living Research Utilization (ILRU)
Institute for Healthcare Improvement (The Conversation Project)
Integrated Benefits Institute
Iowa CareGivers
iRobot
Jewish Family Service of Saint Paul (JFS)
Jewish Federation of North America
J-Sei
Justice in Aging
KBH Advocacy
L’Arche USA

[page 97]
National Strategy to Support Family Caregivers Page 97
LeadingAge
Learn Care Together LLC
Little Lobbyists
Little Tokyo Service Center
L’Orech Yomim/Center for Healthy Living (LOY)
Lucile Packar
d Foundation for Children’s Health
Lunalilo Home
MAC, Inc. Maryland Living Well Center of Excellence
Massachusetts Digital Health Initiative
Massachusetts Executive Office of Elder Affairs
Massachusetts Lifespan Respite Coalition
MCM CPAs and Advisors, LLP
Meals on Wheels America
Missouri Rural Health Association
Montana Family to Family Health Information Center
National Alliance for Direct Support Professionals (NADSP)
National Association for Home Care & Hospice (NAHC)
National Association of Counties (NACo)
National Association of Nutrition and Aging Services Programs (NANASP)
National Brain Health Center for African Americans, Balm in Gilead
National Catholic Partnership on Disability
National Council on Aging (NCOA)
National Disability Rights Network (NDRN)
National Rural Health Association (NRHA)
National Senior Corps Association
Native American Outreach Program, Banner Alzheimer’s Institute
Nevada Office of Aging & Disability Services
New Mexico Caregivers Coalition
North Dakota Respite Coalition
Nourish for Caregivers
Office of Hawaiian Affairs
OK Cares
Paralyzed Veterans of America
Philadelphia Corporation on Aging
Rethink First

[page 98]
National Strategy to Support Family Caregivers Page 98
Rhode Island Department of Human Services
Rural Dementia Caregiver Project, University of California, San Francisco
Silberman Aging, Hartford Center of Excellence in Diverse Aging
South Carolina Respite Coalition
Southern Car
egiver Resource Center (SCRC)
The Alzheimer’s Project
The Renaissance Collaborative (TRC)
The Resource Exchange (TRE)
The Urban Institute
Torchlight
Trellis
United for Caregivers@Work
United Methodist Health Ministry Fund
United Way of Rhode Island/Family Caregiver Alliance of Rhode Island
University of California, San Francisco Healthforce Center
University of Iowa
University of Minnesota Rural Health Research Center
Us Against Alzheimer’s/Latinos Against Alzheimer’s
Vision for Equality
Warrior Care Network, Wounded Warrior Project
Washington County Disability, Aging, and Veteran Services
Wellthy
Working Daughter
Yale New Haven Health/Geriatric Emergency Department Collaborative
Zen Caregiving Project

[page 99]
National Strategy to Support Family Caregivers Page 99
Appendix B: Resources Used in the Development of 
the Strategy
Building a National Strategy to Support Family Caregivers: Findings from Key 
Informant Interviews and Stakeholder Listening Sessions by Pamela Nadash, 
Ph.D.; Taylor Jansen, M.S.; Eileen J. Tell, M.P
.H.; and Marc Cohen, Ph.D.
In Their Own Words-Family Caregiver Priorities and Recommendations: Results 
from a Request for Information 
by Pamela Nadash, Ph.D.; Taylor Jansen, M.S.; 
Eileen J. Tell, M.P .H.; and Mar
c Cohen, Ph.D.
Inventory of Key Family Caregiver Recommendations
Medicaid Supports for Family Caregivers 
by Neva Kaye and Salom Teshale, 
Ph.D.
Medicare and Family Caregivers by Judith A. Stein, Executive Director, and 
David A. Lipschutz, Associate Director, of the Center for Medicare Advocacy
RAISE Act State Policy Roadmap for Family Car
egivers
RAISE Family Caregivers Act Initial Report to Congr ess
Recor
dings and transcripts of meetings of the Advisory Council to Support 
Grandparents Raising Grandchildren
Recordings and transcripts of meetings of the RAISE Family Car egivers Act
 
Advisory Council
SGRG Act Initial Report to Congress
Supporting Family Caregivers of Older Adults with a History of Trauma: 
Implementation Recommendations for the National Family Car egiving Strategy  
by the Jewish Federations of North America
Supporting Grandparents Raising Grandchildr en: Resour ces for Consumers and
  
Professionals
What Family Caregivers Need: Findings from Listening Sessions

[page 100]
National Strategy to Support Family Caregivers Page 100
Acronyms and Abbreviations
AT: Assistive technology
ACF: Administration for Children and Families
ACL: Administration for Community Living
ADL: Activities of daily living
ADPI: Alzheimer’s Disease Programs Initiative (ACL)
ADRD: Alzheimer’
s disease and related dementias
ASPE: HHS Office of the Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation
ASPR: HHS Office of the Assistant Secretary for Preparedness and Response
CARE Act: Caregiver Advise, Record, and Enable Act
CDC: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
CFPB: Consumer Financial Protection Bureau
CHIP: Medicaid and Children’s Health Insurance Program (CMS)
CMS: Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services
CSP: Caregiver Support Program (VA)
DCW: Direct care workforce (or workers)
DOL: U.S. Department of Labor
DME: Durable medical equipment
EAP: Employee assistance programs
ED: U.S. Department of Education
FAA: Federal Aviation Administration
FBO: Faith-based organization
FEMA: Federal Emergency Management Agency
GAO: U.S. Government Accountability Office
HCBS: Home and community-based services
HHS: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
HRSA: Health Resources and Services Administration
I/DD: Intellectual and developmental disabilities
IHS: Indian Health Service
JAHF: The John A Hartford Foundation
LGB: Lesbian, gay, bisexual
LTC: Long-term care
NAC: National Alliance for Caregiving
NASHP: National Academy for State Health Policy

[page 101]
National Strategy to Support Family Caregivers Page 101
NFCSP: National Family Caregiver Support Program (ACL)
NIA: National Institute on Aging
NIH: National Institutes of Health
OAA: Older Americans Act
PTSD: Post-traumatic stress disorder
RAISE: Recognize, Assist, Include, Support, & Engage Act of 2017
RFI: Request for information
SDM: Supported decision making
SAMHSA: Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration
SGRG: The Supporting Grandpar
ents Raising Grandchildren Act
TANF: Temporary Assistance for Needy Families
VA: U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs